Is not the Hand of Joab in all this? OR An Enquiry into the Grounds of a late Pamphlet Intituled, THE MYSTERY OF THE New-fashioned-Goldsmiths, OR Bankers, &c. AND Answering the Exceptions in it to the Bankers Trade. ------ Printed in the Year, 1676.
  An Enquiry into the Grounds of a late Pamphlet Entituled, THE MYSTERY OF THE New-fashioned Goldsmiths, or Bankers, &c. HAving lately seen a Pamphlet under the Title of The Mystery of the New-fashioned Goldsmiths or Bankers, &c. I presently conjectured what I found it to be in the Reading; A prosecution of the design managed of late by so many clandestine whisperings of Jealousie into the Ears of unwary People, and the spreading of false and scandalous Reports, to bring that Breach upon the Credit of this famous City, (and by consequence upon the whole Kingdom) which so many of all degrees and professions have already felt no little of the evil of: The restless Spirit of this Author thinking scorn to reflect upon the most convincing guilt cast upon him by the many Ruines which his past Artifices have wrought, but as if he made it a sport to do mischief, pursues his project by a new device. Thus he endeavours by this pretended Letter to confirm those surmises with a shew of Reason, which he first attempted by rumor and surprize upon the minds of the People; well knowing that false and foolish arguings are then most like to bear a better appearance to them, when by fraud and practise their fears and jealosies are alarm'd, and (by the venomous effect thereof) they stand confounded and prejudiced in their understandings and judgments. 
I marveled at first, comparing the Title (where we have the Author taking upon him the Name of a Merchant) with the Letter, (where I find his opinion so cross to the sentiments of all other of that Profession) what kind of Trader this should be; especially while I find him so much at leisure, as upon so slender a Theam to trace the series of above thirty years, with such abundant industry, concerning the Rise, Growth, State and Decay of the Bankers: But my Genius soon satisfied me in this point, well remembring that there are some Newfashioned Traders, whom I forbear to define further, who under pretence thereof walk the Exchange as very Merchants, that have both time enough to busie themselves about other mens matters, and their Adventures being rather the diversion of their fancies than their business, and way of subsistance, know little, and perhaps care less, what the true Circumstances of a Merchant are with reference to the Banker: and yet (forsooth) presuming under the notion of an observing Merchant, to determine a matter of so much moment to the Interest of the Trade of the whole Kingdome, as no one thing besides it could be. But the matter having a Mystery in it (as he further tells us in his Title) he should have handled it with a little more modesty than he doth, few that attempt to open Mysteries, expounding them so right, but leave just occasion for other men to dissent from their judgments, and oft times to correct their Errors. But enough of the Title, now to the Letter.
 Wherein it being plain that it is the main business of our Author to dissemble his true end in the penning and publishing of it, and yet so to calculate and put it together, as to make the whole drive at the end he designs, it will be requisite to inquire into his end, What it is, and shew, that the pretended occasion of this Letter was not the intent of his writing it; Towards which it is to be observed,
 That it would reflect too much imputation of Levity upon a thirty years observer and discoverer of Mysteries to tell such a long and studied Story to a Country Gentleman, upon the single occasion of his Sons disposal to a Trade, it being of all things most ridiculous in a man that would be had in reputation for wisdom, to shew himself disagreeable in his Discourses, to the nature of the subject whereof he treats. Nor will I so far prejudge his Charity to the Bankers, as that out of any private Pique or Disgust to the persons of them or any of them, he would lay about him as he doth, with a zeal so passionate and implacable.
 The Design then of this Paper must be somewhat more considerable, and is of a more Publick Aspect; and consequently the Product of a good Intention to the Common Good of the Kingdom; or its Contrary, i.e. the working of an Evil and Mischievous Spirit, to promote and compass some private End, that cannot be otherwise brought about but by bringing ruine upon the chief Credits of the Kingdom, and discomposure, disorder, and an unaccountable Jealousie upon the minds of the People.
 Of these two so contrary Ends which hath been in this Gentlemans Design, it will not be impossible from the parts of the Letter, well considered, and the timing of it, to arrive at a satisfaction in it.
 A good and laudable end I would willingly have found in the drift of this Paper, that however I am satisfied, the effect of what our Author hath done is mischievous, yet I might (as one who knowes that in many things we offend all) have retained a favourable esteem of his honest inclinations: But herein I can in no wise reconcile my Reason to any of the Rules of Charity. For it is generally the happiness of a good Purpose to be reduced in all its pursuits to honest Mediums in what it aims at; and it is in truth a Contradiction to the Laws of Property, to do evil that good may come on't. Had our Author design'd sincerely, he would have looked as well to give some tollerable Proof of what he recriminates the Bankers with, as to accuse them; and not only here and there one, but all of them. Nor doth the time of emitting this Paper, favour less of a Peaceable intention: Was there never a time nor occasion offered these thirty years, before this Gentleman's Son was to come Apprentice, to represent these Errors of the Goldsmiths (if they have been guilty of them) to the World? For what season then is it calculated? But to follow on the Victory which false Report, wheedling insinuations into the minds of simple and inconsiderate People, hath obtained against the Bankers Credit without cause: When the Minds of Men are so startled by this means, that no man can be trusted though of never so good Estate; and when for this cause, many Merchants and others of considerable Substance, for want of the ordinary supplies of Mony, are like to suffer in their Reputation both here and beyond the Seas; no punctual payments to be made in the course of Trade, as was wont to be; numerous Bills of Exchange returned with Protest for non-payment; Clothiers and other Tradesmen forced to keep their Commodities on their hands, because the Merchant can neither get in his own Money, nor raise any upon Credit; consequently Fraughts of our Shipping on a suddain much fallen, and few to be had. One would think the sight of these Calamites should make a wise & good Man defer the prosecution of a thing, never so much unfit in his private judgment, rather then pursue it in the sight of such woful accidents: It hath ever been the principal Wisdom of Discreet and Wise Men, even in the Seat of Government, not to be over hasty in breaking inconvenient Customs once rooted by Time and Use, for fear such Alterations might bring great Disadvantages upon the People; but to do it by a certain gradation, that the good of the remove might appear through all the accidental Discommodities of such a change; how much more should our Author in the Point in hand, have considered this Principle before he thus laid about him without fear or wit.
 What can this Letter then of our Authors, duly weighed with the Antecedent preparations to it, and its accompanying Circumstances, import less than an inconsiderate and destructive Design to the unhinging of all the Credits of the Kingdoms? having its Rise from Anger and Ambition, and in its end aiming at the promotion of Fraction.
 The matter of Design being then the Breach of the whole Credit of the Kingdom (wherein the Interest of Trade is most essentially concerned) he singles out the Goldsmiths or Bankers as the chief Seat thereof; and levels two main Pieces of Artillery against them, 1.Their Crimes, 2. Their Insecurity.
 Of the first Schedule of their Crimes managed between them and the Merchants in weighing and culling of Money, &c. they being applyed chiefly to the Goldsmiths of the Old Fashion (as our Author terms them) and not so material to their late and present state, as Bankers, I shall leave some of themselves to vindicate, for fear they have no Country Gentlemens Sons put Apprentices to them; only remembring him of a few things:
 First, That he did very ill, and not like the Man of Conscience to his Country he pretends to be, that knowing of such Practices of the Goldsmiths, and that to the term of place where they acted their Injustice to the Kingdom, he should be silent, when it was in the power of his hand to have discovered and remedied so great a Mischief; no good Laws being wanting on that behalf. Or,
 Secondly, If this confident accusing of them, be more then he hath grounds for, how vile and inhumane is it to reflect at such a rate upon Men, in a thing wherein not only their honesty is taxed; but their chiefest Interests lie obnoxious to danger. And
 Thirdly, Whether he be not unreasonably partial in his reflections; to let the Merchant pass Scot-free, upon such an occasion as that of his dealing for our heaviest Money to transport beyond Sea? For admit the Goldsmiths sold it, (which yet must not be taken for granted because you say so) yet certainly his fault was the greater, who so industriously laboured to procure such Coyn, with a setled intention of conveying it out of the Kingdom for his private advantage, and actually did so, as you accuse him.
 But it may be you will recollect your self, and think fit to write a Letter against the Profession of a Merchant too (excepting some of your own fashion) and when you have got him under the Foot of your Pride and Folly, as you hope shortly to have all the Bankers; we shall be brought into a fine World indeed. Nor so I ought to the contrary, but that they may well defend themselves in what you make the matter of their condemnation; more especially, in that of being Instruments of raising the value of our old Gold. Pray Sir, What made the Merchants so forward to Transport it, but that Profit was to be made of it beyond the Sea? and if so, what likelier way to keep it at home, than by advancing its Price here. And if it was sent away when the Rate was raised, would it not much more have been so, if the value had continued less? only perhaps it might have asked a little longer time, by the Merchants being put to imploy Instruments somewhat more improper then the Goldsmith, to buy it up from private hands. The like may be said for the inequality of the Rate of Guynnies (about which the Goldsmiths are also accused) which were never by any Proclamation of His Majesties, declared a Current Coyn of the Kingdom, and limited to a certain Rate; but left under the Notion of a Commodity, to rise or fall in price as the course of Exchange went in Forreign Parts; for this very reason, that by such raising of the Rate of them, they might be preserved in the Kingdom, when happily the state of Exchange might otherwise have laid a temptation before many for their private gains, to have sent them away. Thus our Author may also in other Points have been a very Incompetent Censor of what the Bankers have done in this distinct Trade and Mystery. In which Case I have sometimes known a wise Man to have confest divers things to be reasonable and good, when the Nature, Grounds, and Ends of them have been opened by one well versed and experienced therein, that he could not in his own single consideration reconcile the Notion of common good and advantage. And if our Author have any measure of Ingenuity, peradventure he also may reflect upon this his hastiness of accusing Men in such matters that he so little understands. It's pretty too to take notice what a young Sophister our Grave Observer is become, when he tells us of seven millions coyned at a time in half Crowns, which he saith was apparently reduced to less then one Million, and layes the whole blame of it at the Bankers doors. Seven Millions of what, in half Crowns? he afterwards tells us seven Millions of Silver, which our ordinary English Dialect would presently interpret to mean Pounds Sterling, if our Reason (which he never design'd his Letter to be examined by) did not contradict the possibility of the thing, and then the Peoples mouthes might be opened indeed against the Banker, which is all the Mark he aims at. But admitting our Author to be a little out of the way of writing agreeable English, and that by the seven Millions in half Crowns, and the seven Millions of Silver; he intends no more then seven Millions of half Crown pieces; Lets consider whether he be any more honest in the thing, then he is clear in the expression. Seven Millions in half Crowns, by my Arithmetick, amounts to eight hundred seventy five thousand pounds Sterling that he alledges was then Coyned: But Sir, I have met with as likely an Observer in this Point, as your self, who assures me, it will be no injury to tell you, that you are out in your Calculation almost half in half; and if you be so ignorant, or insincere in an Extream on that hand, how shall we trust the truth of your Observation and Candor in what you affirm on the other, that the Money then coyned was apparently reduced to less then one Million by a new mischeivous trade of the Goldsmiths. But I do not well so much as to name truth and sincerity with respect to any thing in this Letter, which was never designed to be drawn up by the line of any such Vertues, Blackning of Men being a far better way to do our Authors business: And it were endless to open all the false suggestions that are in the composition of it.
 Next to that, I find the chief crime objected against them, is, The great advantages they have made in the course of their Trade, especially when they dealt with his Majesty, and bought up Bills, Orders, Tallyes, &c. Indeed Sir you do not well to tax them at this time a Day with those Offences. Why did not such an Observer of the State of the Bankers as you, urge their Sin of 10.l. per Cent. upon them then? when if your Arguments had been powerful to touch their Consciences, they might by this time have reckoned that Charity in you, which as matters stand, they can receive under no other Notion but that of reproach and spite. And yet, hark you Sir, Hath it not been the Principle of one you know That as the occasion and Circumstances may be, there is really no wrong put upon a mans Conscience, nor injustice offered to another, to accept of above 6 per Cent. for the advance of Money, nay nor any breach of the Law therein? And if neither the person of another be oppressed, nor the Law violated, where is the Offence? But now you cry out aloud against the Banker, as an unpardonable Extortioner, if in any case he exceed the terms of 6 per Cent. which renders it not unneedful (for the Readers sake) to put one or two Cases to your enquiry about this matter.
 Let the first be that of Discounts upon Bills of Exchange, which you tax, among other things as against Law, and very oppressive: But, Why so? Really you puzzle my wits to find a Reason for what you say, and you have given us none to think off. A Bill of Exchange during its Negotiation hath never in any Time or Memory, gon under any other Notion than (till I can find a better word for't) a meer piece of Merchandize, which if a man will dispose of, he must do it at the Market rate, or (to speak more like a Merchant) at Price Currant; for there is a certain variation of the rate of Discounts as the occasions for Money are great or less; and they were never higher than your Self and your Con-sociates have lately made them by your new-fashioned Artifices.
 Another Case lies in the Bonds given by the Merchants to his Majesty at the Custom-house, for the additional Duty upon Wine, wherein the Act of Parl. allows the discount of 10 per Cent. to the Merchant if he pay ready money. What then if the Bankers shall lay down the value to the King upon those Bonds: I put it by way of Inquiry, since plainly that allowance was given, to accomodate the Kings present service, Whether it be an Evil in the Banker, to take that allowance, upon serving the Publick occasions with a present supply, on the Credit of those Bonds, which the Merchant should and might have had by the grant of the Law, if he had paid down the Money himself?
 But what the monied Men and Creditors of the Bankers will most look at, is, what our Author will alledge against the Security of Money in their hands, which therefore we must alike look into. And because the Creditor will be nice in his Enquiries here, I will first state his Objections truly, and give such Answers as I will with the same freedom, leave to the Readers judgment: My design being only to disabuse my fellow Citizens and others, that they be not frightned with shadowie appearances, nor suffer themselves to be thus play'd upon by every sly and subtil Gamster, to disturb the setled course of their lawful advantages, to gratifie the humor of any person or faction, whose end is more themselves than the Publick good.
 He Objects then against the Bankers Credit. First, There being no safety in dealing with the King, while the deplorable Crys of the Widows and Fatherless are such, whose Money, as he phrazeth it, they say at least, they lent his Majesty, and cannot repay them. And did they not lend it the King? (Why delight you thus in the soul course of casting Dirt?) And for that, Tallyes, Orders, and the Great Seal it self are found to be no security.
 Secondly, That He cannot imagine how Bread should be got by their Trade of borrowing money at lawful Interest, to lend it upon unlawful to private persons; though they can silence their Consciences forgetting Christianity, &c.
 Thirdly, That the Bankers are not Men of greater Abilities nor acquired Parts than other Tradsmen, nor better instructed than others to imploy greater Stocks in an advantagious Trade, &c.
 To these Objections respectively, a few words.
 To the first; I take it for granted that the Reasons urged upon account of the detainer of money in the Exchequer; and the stop of the proper Course thereof, did and may give a just hesitation to the minds of men; and his Majesty himself, as well as the People, hath, I doubt not, reflected upon that Counsel, with the greatest dislike and indignation before this day. Our Author nevertheless deals herein very uncharitably with his Majesty as well as elsewhere with the Bankers, in alledging somethings utterly untrue; for though there was in that unwarrantable Counsel, a breach upon the Course of Tallies and Orders; Yet he taxeth the Violation of the Great Seal without ground. He must refer in that point of the Great Seal, to the business of the Custom Farm, in which it is true the Patent that had already past the Seal for the main part of the Customs was resigned up again, but not forced.
 This Gentleman I guess cannot but well remember at whose house this was acted, and who had a main hand in the contrivance of it; and if so, he may withal call to mind that the occasion of that surrender of the Seal was from some difference about the Termes of a second Pattent relating to the Wine Act, which while the then Farmers insisted upon, and more refused; some of them with less foresight than was convenient, offered the acquitting of the whole Bargain, and the Seal whereby they held their Right in the other Part; and having so offered it, it was accepted as suiting the present Design, without possibility of retrieve.
 This Gentleman is yet much more out of the way, to assert that the Persons concerned in the Exchequer Debt, have not their Interest to buy them Bread: May not a man well doubt the truth of his Observations for so many years past, who errs in a Point that is now in Action; for who knows not that there is a settlement of seventy thousand l. per Annum, for two years out of the Publick Revenue under the Great Seal, for the quarterly payment of those Interests to the Bankers? which is so punctually satisfied to all such whose Accounts are stated, that it is not the Kings fault, if every Creditor have not his Interest paid him every quarter day, such Security hath that Great Seal given.
 He knew well enough also, what fresh Assurances are lately made to the Bankers, of having the said Interest continued by force of another Great Seal, and the Additional Hopes (as is most just) of some further way of Settlement for the securing of those Debts: And it is much to be desired that his Majesty will, as from the Honour and Justice of the thing it self, so also from the Consideration of the Industrious improvement of that pernicious Counsel, to him and his Affairs; give some speedy issue to this matter.
 It is to be hoped that such a conjuncture of Affairs, and Inclination of our then chief Ministers, as happened at that unhappy juncture of shutting up of the Exchequer, will never meet again: Or, that God in his Mercy will give the King, in the experience of the fatal Consequences thereof, a Noble Resolution to discountenance and withstand such ill advice.
 To the second Objection, That there is no way for the Bankers to get Bread, if their Loans to his Majesty cease; and for which he gives us this Potent Argument, That he cannot imagine how they should.
 I Answer, That running upon Imaginations as he doth throughout his whole Letter, if this prove otherwise, the most part of what he hath said, may be suspected for a mear piece of fancy. He cannot imagine it, how? by borrowing Money at lawful Interest, and lending it to private persons at unlawful. No, Methinks it is plain and easie to be imagined, how Money may be got in this way, if they do (as he saith) silence Conscience, forget Christianity, and by Hook, and by Crook, make the most of their Cash by oppressive Exactions: Is it not a wonder his Imagination should fall so short, that is so much in the exercise of it?
 But to disprove our Authors Imagination, without these crooked ways of oppression; Are there not those among them, who (thanks be to God) have got their Bread, and it is to be hoped, enabled to lay up something for their Wives and Children, without any hazardous dealings with the King, or being so exacting as he speaks of; Hath not many been greatly intrusted and imployed this way, since the Exchequer was shut up, who are both able to pay their Creditors, and have got their Bread and somewhat more, and yet stand free from this Imputation by all, but this Gentleman, that its likely never suffered by any of them. Methinks the state of some of them that have fallen by the deadly breath of such as our Author, and have thereby their condition in Estate exposed to all, may better instruct him in this Point; and if he had that Christianity in him, which he so much blames others for, it might and should work pitty and remorse in his Soul, that by his sly Insinuations, false Suggestions, and all manner of Reproaches, he should have been a means to bring disreputation upon the Persons, and prejudice upon the Families of such who are by this means cast down.
 It may, and I trust will also teach those that have Moneyes in the hands of such men, not to suffer themselves to be abused by such petty Artifices, while they have thereby been made the Instruments of others undoing, and of injury to themselves, upon the meer Grounds of ungrounded Jealousy: For where is the Person that hath been so earnest upon them for Money; who can define any true Reason why he hath so done? Only his imagination hath been disordered, and his fears raised by the false Suggestions of these pestilent Incendiaries.
 And what have they advantaged themselves by those indeliberate and forward Demands, but the contrary; for if they had judged of these Artifices as they are, and not run so unreasonably upon those Bankers, they might as occasion required have been supplyed as aforetime, with those Summs which they are now forced to stay for, notwithstanding all emergencies, a much longer season.
 The third Objection consists of so many Particulars, that I must take them up as I go. He first taxeth them for, being Men of no greater Natural Abilities and acquired Parts, than other Tradsmen: What then, Sir? If they have but a proportion of understanding in their Trade, to their Fellow Citizens (for the Trading-Citizens are no Fools) and an honest Design and Caution in their undertaking it, is enough to their Creditors. I, But they are no better Instructed than others, to employ great stocks; Are they not? Then indeed I should think you in the right on't, when you tell your Country-Gentlemen, That all the Arts a Goldsmith can teach him, will not be worth one of those two hundred Pounds, he designed with him. But, pray Sir, where were your Natural Abilities and Acquired Parts, when you thus Wrote? Is there no difference in Skill of this Nature, between a Man whose Business and Education hath layn for many years in Credit, and Improvement of Money, in ways of Advantage, who is known of all that have occasion of Supply for their present Conveniences, to be Persons dealing in that Way through all the various Courses of it, and another Tradesman whose Education and Life, hath only Experienced him in the Management of some particular Commodities, and the Improvement of them to his best Interest. 
Sure, Sir, If you had consulted your self, your Acquired Parts would have told you, there is here some difference; but it bears the shaddow of an Argument against the Bankers to the unheedy, and then, whether Sense or Nonsense, Reason or Contradiction, Truth or Falshood, all's one with you. But, They have no greater Skill in Law than others, to judg of Securities to be taken for Money, nor have they more knowledg of Men, to Guess at the Value of their Bonds.
 How our Authors Passion blinds his Reason! Would you have every Banker become a Lawyer, or else leave his Trade? On common Occasions every Mans Natural Abilities and Experience in the World (whereof I hope you will grant our Bankers to have some) may serve the turn; and in cases difficult and out of the way of ordinary Dealings, they are generally Men of more Caution to their own Estates, and the Trust they have from others, than that I believe they would be satisfied with so much Law as our Author himself hath, when so many able and knowing Lawyers are so near at hand. Besides, such a Man of Wit as you, might have considered, that there is a Power in these ways of Credit, to oblige such Men as the Bankers deal with, to much to Punctuality; and but that I would fain resemble our Author in speaking once like a Man of Mysterie, I could give good Reasons for it: He is miserably out, and speaks as unlike a Merchant as ever I heard, to tell us, the Bankers knew the Characters of Men no better than others, when of all in the World they have the Advantage this way. What gives the Knowledg of Men as Men, but Converse? What of the Estates of Men, more than frequent and ordinary Dealings with them in the point of Money? Which with other Collaterial Observations that are Coincident with it, gives the truest measure of Mens Estates. How then in these ways, is the Integrity and Generosity of a Mans Dealings better discovered? This manner of Corespondence then, these Bankers having had with the most they deal with for many years, How should they but know Men better than others, and be able to proportion their demand of Security for them? But our Author is not yet at an end of this Argumentative Paragraph against the Bankers Credit: I wish his next Reasons be better than his former, and favour more of Natural Ability, and sincerity of Mind.
 He puts the Question very seriously from the Premises that I have already Answered, How then should they be able to make more Interest of Moneys, than other Men? How then? It's a Deduction from your Premises, is it? Why then Il'e tell you how the Case stands, if some of your Premises have no Reason in them, and others no Truth; what then becomes of your Hero then, and of all your Subsequent Arguments, or rather Artificers deduced from them. If they be really more able than other Men to improve Money; if they have as much Skill in the Law as they have ordinarily need for, and know where to go for the rest when Occasion calls, that their Security may be good; If they have more knowledg of Men than others, which are all the Principles that you derive this how then from; Why then, I may naturally turn the Argument upon you, and tell you that all your Natural Abilitys and Acquired Parts, have missed the Mark hugely, when you doubt the Bankers Trade to such a Degree, as to make it a Wonder how they should be able to Improve Money better and more securely than others. And if you would know further how they can keep open their Shops, notwithstanding their dead Stocks of Cash to answer ordinary Demands (for such extraordinary and unreasonable Demands, as your Whispering and Calumniating Gang hath lately put People upon, nothing can be Sued for) and Maintain their Servants, and pay their Landlords; I tell you again, that besides the Keepers of their Running Cash, for which they pay no Interest, the Matter lies in their Knowledg and Way of Improving Money, better than others. It's not to say what a Bankers Skill in this sense will honestly extend to: Il'e tell you they are archer Men in their Trade than you and I think of. And I am verily of Opinion, that they make (as you say they must do to get ought by it) more than Nine pound per centum of their Money, in their way of Improvement; yet I will not as you do, Charge them with Extortion therein, unless I knew things better.
 You may remember, I have put you two Cases, wherein possibly Ten Pound per centum may be got without a Mans becoming a Transgressor; and the Bankers, it's likely, may know more. We are commanded to have over all, Charity; a Garment that I desire to value and keep uppermost, though you seem so daringly to reject it, and to put on that of Censure and Reproach. And truly, every ones Charity is there called for, while we hear no Body crying out against them: None can be Advocate for all of a Trade, but for most of them; the chief Dealers at their Shops cannot exclaim of their Extortion, but that their extraordinary and emergent Occasions, have well born the extraordinary Requitals, which have been given to them: But certainly all will have cause ere long, if the Gentleman gain his end, to cry out upon him.
 The Merchant when it may be, that Two, Three, Four, or Five Hundred Pounds, which might have been had at a Bankers Shop, to serve the Exigency of his Occasions, cannot now be had in the City of London, in any reasonable time; or if he may be Accommodated by a Scrivener, the Trouble about it, Procuration for it, and the Time he must be obliged to keep it, beyond the Circumstances of his Occasion, may probably amount to more than Twelve Pound per centum, when he might have it at the Bankers at a lesser Rate. The Moneyed Man, when he sees the Banker born down without cause, and his own money lying in a Chest without improvement; himself in no way to put it out with security and profit: All that have experienced the ease, conveniency, and prosperous Trade of the City, by and under this way of Credit, and if after all, his own Conscience cry out of him, it is but that which is to be looked for, as the effect of these pernitious and ruinous Contrivances, unless it be already feared as with a hot Iron.
 He would put the Creditors in dreadfull doubt of the Bankers, for fear of Informers against them for notorious Contracts, and the pretence of great Charges they are at to keep off Suits of that nature, and to sue out Pardons. And though I have little reason to believe any thing he saith, yet I should have past it in silence were it not for two things.
 First, That I am confident he never heard of any Usurious Contracts pleaded against them, though they must have been as publick at Westminster-Hall, or the Guild-Hall in London.
 Secondly, I cannot imagine how our Author should come to know what Charges they are at to keep off Suits of that Nature. If he search into the matter, I am of Opinion hee'l find it quite otherwise. And for Pardons, there's an Intimate of yours, that may vye in that Point with any half dozen of the guiltiest of them if I be rightly informed.
 But after all these fine knacks of Conceipt (aiming at reason but unhappily falling short of it) to blast the Credit of the Bankers, he darts one more with the same purpose, and tinctur'd with somwhat more than ordinary Anger, That I cannot for my Life discern the Point of.
 It's Their being trusted ten times more than they are worth upon Personal Security, and many times their Note alone taken for five hundred pounds a thousand pounds, or more. And yet those free Lenders, as he calls them, (for he's very much out of Humour) would scarce be satisfied with two or three mens Bonds for a thousand pounds, that are known to be worth, at least five thousand pounds a man.
 Shall I ask our Author whether this was practized without reason and good experience by those that did it? Surely not without ground, while he characterizeth them to be men so wary in the disposal of their money to others. They knew then what they did; and no doubt acted upon some principles of reason herein, notwithstanding your censure of their discretion, from the meer Authority of an, I say, for that's the most powerful part of the Argument he uses against this practise, while his pretences of the hazard of the Bankers disposal of money, and their capacity to do it more than other men, have already been found so lame & ridiculous. Such an Observer as he, a man would think, might have taken up some considerations from so remarkable and continued a practise as this to have better bethought himself what he was about to do, when he began to breath out such Venom against the Bankers. Is't not obvious that the very All of a Banker lies upon his utmost punctuality, whereas other men as the exigency of occasions may be, oft times dispence with it without any suspition. Me thinks the very awe of the power of Credits continued through the course of so many years, the free, generous, and unconcern'd reliance of Men upon them; their efficacy to raise, enliven and encrease the Trade of the Kingdom to such a notable degree, should have dampt his confidence in a pursuit of this nature, and forbad his falling foule upon so sacred a thing.
 But the Rise of this design is such as all things must give way to. Here's Anger and Ambition, as I tould you, in the minds of some body, and a New-faction to be introduc'd. And what are the Credits of the Kingdom, the Ruines of the Bankers, Disreputation of the Merchant, Abuse put upon the jealousie of Creditors, Losses of the People, laying wast our Trade, Confusions and Disorders in the course of all affairs in the Nation. What is their own Consciences, Honour, or any thing, to the wreaking of this Anger, gratifying this Ambition, and pulling down of others that themselves may be advanc'd. To arrive at this false accusing and whispering about, from one place of Concourse to another, How is it with such a Man? Does he pay well, or's at a stand? I hope you are not concern'd. I assure you such a friend of mine hath drawn his money. I wish all be well. A word's enough to the wise. Some taking the confidence to abuse the Name of a Noble Person, because hee's accounted a wise Man and a fit Example, reporting in the City, and writing into the Country, that his Lordship hath had great sums of money in the hands of such and such which he hath called out, whereas the parties so mentioned ner'e ow'd his Lordship one farthing: And a thousand such petty (but as they have prov'd over-prevalent) insinuations have been used; vented by their half-witted Emissaries, (of which they have both young and old, rich and poor to make use of, and to act their tricks with a world of zeal and gravity) while among themselves they make the best sport imaginable, in telling what a good Instrument (they mean a fool) they have made of such and such a sober Citizen or Inns of Court Gentleman. I say to arrive at these ends of their own, none of these Machinations must be accounted a Crime. And let not our Author tax me of uncharitableness herein, or come with any such disguises, as a Letter to a Country Gentleman hereafter, For upon better Evidence than that the Coyn was carried into the Cocklofts, this is the very Rise and design of this Epistle.
 And what are these Gentlemen that all these things must make way for? Is it not Character enough to tell the Reader, that they are even of the same Spirit with our Author. What need we say more, or what more can be said to shew us what we are to expect from them, when they have made us the silly Instruments of their own Grandeur.
 Can we hope for that good from them they pretend to? Freedom from those publick Evils and Calamities they complain of? Honour and a Generous Design for the Publick is adequate and like it self in all its Parts and motions. Noble ends are never aimed at by such peaking, base, sneaking and destructive Courses.
 Whither will they have brought us, if they accomplish their ends and gain the Ascendant? Will their Advancement be a recompence for what we suffer by their means? I doubt, had they a Will to do good, they'l find it hath been an easier business to destroy the Trade and Credit of a Nation, than to heal it, and bind up it's Breaches. As the less difficult part of the two, it will be well if they make not use of our Poverty to oppress, and our Ruine, (much wrought about by our own hands, while we are so fondly influenced by their Subtitles) to run us still into further Calamities. For if they have decry'd Credit that the present Incumbents may fall, What will they do in their Places without it? And, if Money must be had, and no Credit be continued, what way they will advise to, I leave to other Conjectures than my own.
 My Lord Bacon tells us, Nothing doth more hurt in a State, then when Cunning Men pass for Wise; and yet if all will avail to make the People (whose good I charitably aim at in these Reflexions) to consider what they are doing, while they dance after the Pipe of such Crafts masters as these, and be no more entangled and bereaved of their Wits and Interests by their deceitfull pretences and practises but proceed in all their Concernments, like men endowed with Reason, I shall gain my desire. I dispair not of it, though its sad to see the generality so much enclined to another Spirit.
 Our Author ends with a solemn Enquiry, Whether any Man that hath Exercised the Mystery of Banking, hath living or dying gone off the Stage with a clear good Estate?
 I had scarce taken notice of it, but that he hath just before been telling us of Scripture Commands, and follows it with a profession that he Judges no Man. If you know none such that have been acquainted with their Mystery so long, let me tell you, You have either a very short Memory, or have been a very shallow Observer. But your meaning in this Enquiry is also very well understood. And yet it follows; I Judge no Man. No Sir, Why rais'd you the question then? If you speak the truth, I doubt you can give no very good account on't. In earnest, I hear of several that are gone off with very clear and good Estates, but I think it not Manners to expose their Names to our Authors Curiosity. Judg no man? and yet after the rate you have done, condemn and contrive their Ruine!
 Give me leave to end with an Enquiry too, What shall be given unto thee? Or, What shall be done unto thee, thou False Tongue?
 ------ FINIS. 
