REMARKS Upon a BOOK, Entituled, The PRESENT STATE OF THE SUGAR COLONIES CONSIDER'D. Wherein some of the Consequences and Effects of Restraining our Trade are examined.------  ------  LONDON: Printed for J. Peele at Locke's-Head in AmenCorner, Pater-noster-Row. 1731.
  REMARKS Upon a BOOK, Entituled, The Present State of the Sugar Colonies considered, &c. IT is not possible that the Island of Barbadoes in particular, without making less Sugar, can ever make more Rum than they have lately made; nor can it be imagined, that they will make more Sugar there in a Year, than hath been made there in Time past; yet all the Sugar, Rum, and whatever has been produced there, has been taken off their Hands, at a Price too always above what these Goods might have been purchased for from the French. Now supposing our other Islands to have produced all the Commodities which they possibly could, and that all those Commodities have been constantly taken off their Hands by England, and our Northern Plantations, and have not been enough for them; but they have been under the Necessity of taking vast Quantities of Molosses from the foreign Islands; which some of those Northern People daily distil into Rum, and are likewise glad to take some Rum from these Foreigners to supply their Indian Trades, their own People, and, what is still more absolutely necessary, their Fisheries, which above all Trades whatever deserve the highest Encouragement. Supposing this to be the Case (which it really is) then it is obvious that our Northern Plantations ought not to be restrained from trading to the foreign Islands. In many Trades it is not easy to distinguish the profitable from the disadvantageous. This of the Fishery is an inexhaustible Mine. Hence arises more visible Advantage than by any Trade which we drive; yet a very little Deviation from the Ways we are now settled in might ruin the whole Trade. I will take upon me to say, that if our Northern Colonies should be prohibited from trading to the foreign Islands, that in two Years Time the French in their own Vessels would supply all the Fishermen that were left (if any should be left) with Rum and Molosses from Cape Breton; and the Charge to prevent this (if it were possible) could not be sustained by the Trade.
 But to reduce this Argument to Order. Barbadoes, all the Leeward Islands, and Jamaica, produce all the Sugar, Rum and Molosses which they can produce; and these are all taken off their Hands by our own People, and our own Shipping: And though they do not produce sufficient for all our Demands, they desire that we will oblige ourselves to take none from any others, though those would sell us cheaper: And this they say is for our Interest, which I am so blind as not to see; but should really think, that if after our own Sugars, &c. were brought home, and we had not quite enough, and knew where to get them, especially when they were to be got cheaper, which I certainly do, that it would be better to send for them, than wait a great while, and at last be obliged to buy them out of Hucksters Hands. Nay I protest, so far am I from seeing, as these Gentlemen would have me, that I think if we did not want an Ounce of any of those Commodities, and could be employed to bring all the Sugar from Brazil, and all the Rum, Sugar, and Molosses from the West-India Islands, that we might make as good a Hand of it as any trading People whatever, perhaps have full as much Profit upon the Whole, as the Owners.
 Now admit these Islands could but just supply our own Necessities, we should not have one Ounce for Exportation; whereas now we have just so much more as we bring home from all other Places. Let us not be so weak as, at the Loss of the Employment of so many of our own Shipping, and possibly the very Destruction of our American Fishery and Indian Trade, and consequently the Impoverishment of our Northern Colonies, to enrich those Islanders, who yet are the most opulent, most splendid, and gay People in all his Majesty's Dominions. But if these Islands are really under any Hardships, which I think won't be denied, when I fairly state the Case, and shew some Advantages that the French have over our Sugar Colonies, I persuade my self it will be thought the Interest of this Kingdom to take away all unreasonable and unnecessary Restraints upon that Trade.
 The French by two several Edicts, one Jan. 27, 1726, and another in August 1727. took off a Restraint, which till that Time they had continued upon their own Sugar Colonies, viz. that of obliging all their Ships to come to France first, with the Production of those Colonies; and by those Edicts, gave full Liberty to their Merchants to send directly to Spain all Sugars, and other Merchandize, the Produce of their Islands in America, (Muscovado or raw Sugars only excepted). By this the French, who I am confident, cannot navigate so cheap as we, have an Advantage of getting their Produce to Market cheaper; and consequently, supposing our Plantations and theirs upon a Par in all other Respects, can get, when our own would lose. Wherefore, tho' I cannot think it proper or convenient at this Time to restrain or prohibit our Northern Colonies, or indeed any other Trade that we have with the French in the West-Indies for Sugar, Rum, Molosses, or any other Productions of their Islands: Yet I am of Opinion that our own People ought to be put upon a Par, at least with those of any other Nation, especially where it will not be attended with any ill Consequence to this Kingdom: And therefore to put our own Colonies upon an equal Foot with the French, I think that they ought to be permitted to carry their clay'd Sugar directly to any Part of Europe to the Southward of Cape Finisterre, obliging the Shipping to the same Rules and Restrictions that those are under, which carry Fish and Rice from our Northern Colonies there.
 With me there is no Doubt of such Regulation being an Advantage to this Kingdom as we are now circumstanced. Suppose for Instance, that John English is at Barbadoes possess'd of 2000 Hogsheads of Sugar, and that he is well inform'd that all the Markets in Europe to the Northward of Cape Finisterre are fully supplied with Sugars, he really wants to turn that Sugar into Money, and wants that Money in England; but, as I said before, England being supplied, and he wanting Money only there, and hearing also that his Sugars would sell in Spain or Italy, he carries them there directly and sells for Money, which he remits to England, in this Case England becomes possess'd of the whole Money these Goods sold for at the best Market, only one Freight deducted, that is, the Freight from Barbadoes to the Place of Sale directly, which to Spain, or even to Italy, will not exceed the usual Freight to England. Now if he is oblig'd to go to England first, though he knows that Kingdom cannot take them off his Hands, and that he must carry them to Spain or Italy afterward, will he not have a great deal of Reason to complain, and may he not say, and reasonably too, "Why do you put me to this unnecessary Expence of double Freight and double Charge? Every Penny which I lose is lost to the Kingdom, or would be saved to the Kingdom by the contrary Practice. For suppose, for Example, on this Account, here are 200 Men of your Kingdom employ'd in this Service, for which your Kingdom is to receive a certain Price or Reward, is not the quickest and cheapest Way of doing it the best for you, as well as me? You have Business enough to employ those Men in afterward, or if not, they may be profitably employed by others, and by that Means acquire just as much more as I should save. Will not my Sugars sell for as much more, when carried from our own Islands directly, as if they had been brought to England and landed there, and then shipped off for such Place? Yes surely, and with less Waste to me, as well as Charge, the whole Produce of my Sugars will as certainly center in England in one Case as the other."
 I will defy any one to prove the contrary of this, yet do we still continue to restrain our own People from enlarging and extending our own Trade, while other Nations are using all the Means they apprehend to be in their Power to extend and enlarge theirs. Hence I apprehend the Reasonableness of tolerating our Shipping to carry clayed Sugars to any part of Europe within the Limits aforesaid; and whereas there remained as a Duty to the Crown about 8d 1/2 on every 112l. exported hence, I would propose, instead thereof, to pay to his Majesty's Receiver of enumerated Duties in all our Colonies, 12 Pence per Hundred upon all Sugars shipp'd thence, for any Part of Europe to the Southward of Cape Finisterre. This is what I really apprehend will be for the Good of this Kingdom; we shall in all Respects be Carriers of the same Quantities we now are, and there will be gained or saved to this Kingdom just so much as the Freight from England to Spain, or Italy, at least. This I conceive will put our Sugar Colonies upon a Par with the French; and I should really be very glad if I knew of any other Way of serving our Islands without Detriment to the Publick. Should we lay on any Duties upon the French Commodities imported to our Northern Colonies, they ought to be very small, lest we should lose what is so very beneficial, I mean the employing of at least 15000 Tons of Shipping, and not less than 2000 Men, beside the Advantage of supplying our Fisheries and Indian Trades cheap, thereby also enabling the Northern Colonies to make such considerable Remittances here in Money, as well as in Indigo, Cocoa, Sugar and Rum. For, as they trade for all these Commodities with the French as well as English, whatever remains over and above their own Use, is saved and sent home, more especially such Part or Commodity as was produced on any of our own Islands, which is equal to so much real Treasure brought into this Kingdom, either to supply our own Wants, or to sell to our Neighbours; for all which, beside the real Freight and Commissions staying with us for ever, we send them in Return woollen Manufactures principally, by which Means we are greater Gainers than we should be by those who took from us principally the Manufactures of India, Holland, Flanders, or Germany; and all that is gained this Way, is by our own Labour chiefly.
 The Lumber which our Northern Colonies supply the French with costs nothing but Labour, and their Horses would be of no Value, but for that Trade; and what is worst of all, if we did not supply them that Way, they could serve themselves, by which they would increase their Trade and Navigation exactly in Proportion to our Loss. With Lumber they might be supplied from their Settlements of Mobile, Pansecola, and Fort Louis, in the Bay of Apalachy. I will suppose a Sloop loaden with Lumber there, (and she may be as easily loaden there as in any Part of the Universe) and will leave it to any Man acquainted with Navigation and Freighting of Sloops, whether in Time of Peace particularly, if he were offered twenty Shillings in a Ton more Freight from thence to Martinico than from Carolina, Virginia, Philadelphia, New-York, Rhode-Island, Boston, or any other Place on the English Continent of America, he would not accept of it from the Bay of Apalachy. I declare I would; and I am persuaded I could make more Voyages in a Year between Mobile and Martinico, than I could between Boston and Martinico, as I should be pretty sure of a fair Wind always from Martinico down to the Bay; the Time of gaining a Passage thence through the Gulph, would not be longer than the Advantage I had by the Shortness of the Passage down: And considering that in this last Case you are more out of the Way of NorthWest Winds, and never in the Way of them, but when they would be fair for you, really I can make but little Difference in the Choice of the Voyages; but admitting it were twenty Shillings per Ton, what a prodigious Sum should we lose, and the French be so little, if any worse, supplied?
 Then as to Horses and Mules, they may be supplied with them full as cheap from the Spanish Coast. I allow that they must give perhaps thirty Pieces of Eight for each Mule upon the Coast in the Way of Trade; or if they purchase at Curasoa, as they generally have done, they pay so much Cash; I will suppose in this Case, after Freight and all other Charges, that a Mule in Martinico cannot be sold for less than 400 Livres (i.e.) 25 Pistoles there. In this Case Martinico is as well supplied as if they could have New England Horses, or any other, at half that Price; and it will be allowed me by all who know this Trade, that I have not advanced any Thing about the Mule Trade which hath not been practised. Horses are of such small Value on the Coast of Coro, that as fine Horses as I ever beheld are sold for two or three Pieces of Eight each in Trade. These we cannot carry to Martinico, because the Charge would be the same, or more, than on a Mule, and they would not sell for above half a Mule's Price. I have been told by both French and Spaniards, that a Mule will continue fit for Service 45 or 50 Years, and that they are not so liable to Diseases in any Degree as Horses, though they use them more cruelly, and take no manner of Care of them. I have shewn where they may have their Lumber, and where they may again be supplied with Cattle more to their Profit than they now are.
 I will just mention an Advantage which the Government at present enjoys by the Importation of Rum, which I apprehend would be quite lost, should our Northern Plantations be restrained from trading to the Foreign Islands. All the Rum which our own Islands produce, is not sufficient to supply the Northern Colonies, if there be Truth in some Reports, and I am inclinable to believe them, viz. That  there hath been 20000 Hogsheads of French Molosses manufactured into Rum in New England in one Year, beside French Rum imported (Vide p. 19. of a Book, entituled, The Present State of the Sugar Colonies considered.); the Consumption on that Commodity must be prodigious there, for I am well assured that a Gallon of Molosses will make a Gallon of Rum; consequently there was, at only 63 Gallons per Hogshead of Molosses, (though they are generally from 80 to 100 Gallons) 1,260,000 Gallons of Rum made in Boston in one Year, which I believe is more than ever was imported in one or two Years into England. This will plainly prove, that if Boston must and doth expend annually such a Quantity, or but half of it, by prohibiting the Trade between the Northern Colonies and the French Islands, not one Drop of Rum could be brought home here, and consequently the Revenue would suffer just the Sum now received on that Head, until the French had settled into a Trade of sending their Rum to Europe, which there is no Reason to doubt but they would, as well as send Sugars to Holland and Hambourgh. Then I expect we should have French Rum imported here (as we now have their Brandy) to the Loss of all the Advantage we now receive by that Commodity.
 Some Gentlemen, I am told, say, that the French would throw away all their Molosses, if the New-England Men did not take it off their Hands; whence they can have Reason for this, I cannot imagine. Fifty, nay forty Years ago, I have heard that the Molosses were all wasted in Jamaica. They produced fine Sugars may Years before they made any Rum, and were taught at last by the Barbadians to make Rum, even better than their own. The Northern Colonies used to take all that they produced at first, but when they excelled in the Goodness of that Commodity, and found that it would answer to send it to England, they raised their Price so high, that very small Quantities are taken from thence by the Northern Colonies, yet they want not a Vent for all that they can produce; and I am well assured, that if Jamaica were now to be hindered or restrained from importing Rum or Molosses into Great Britain, or any other of his Majesty's Dominions, that they would notwithstanding such Restraint, have Vent for their Rum; and that there would not be one Drop less made, nor one Gallon of Molosses wasted, more than now is. The Dutch would be glad to carry it to Holland, if it were but a very little cheaper than it generally is in Jamaica. It is not an unusual Thing for the homeward-bound Ships in Curasoa to take in Proportion to the Price of Rum from three or four; to twenty Puncheons of Kill Devil, as they call it. I have known vast Quantities of Rum there at a time, as well as Sugars, from the English, French, and Dutch Islands, and the Island of St. Thomas. There are many Ships of vast Burden there frequently, and they are glad of Sugars, or indeed whatever will answer in Holland, to fill up; and if we were weak enough to suppose that the French would waste their Molosses now they have learnt (tho' God knows they knew before we did) how to extract a Spirit from Molosses, we should be as much deceived as those Gentlemen are, who think they could not be supplied with Cattle or Lumber but from our Plantations.
 During Queen Anne's War they made Rum in Martinico, for I have tasted it on Board of more than one Martinico Prize during that War, and they then found Cask for their Sugar, Rum and Indico, &c. In the Year 1713, or early in 1714, when I believe that Island had never received any of our Northern Lumber, but such as they had taken as Prize during the preceding War; then was I told by several Gentlemen of that Island, that notwithstanding that long War, they had increased their Plantations, Numbers and Produce to such a Degree, that they then employed three Times the Quantity of Shipping that they could before that War. At Fort St. Pierre, and Fort-Royal, there was then above sixty Sail of Ships, some of them of forty Guns, and all Merchantmen; even then there was a good deal of Wood upon the Island; and I have seen many Hundreds, I believe many Thousand of Tierces, made of the Wood which grew on the Island. I have seen the Coopers making them, and if that Island is now cleared, surely they would make free enough with Dominico, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent; as they hitherto have done for Mill-Wood, and their principal Timber, &c. Whereas if we were to exert our selves, as I believe we have a Right to do, and hinder them, have not I shewn where they could have enough? But the Danger of their encreasing upon our Backs in America ought to be of some Moment in our Considerations on this Affair, as well as the Increase of their Shipping and Navigation, which, in Case of any Rupture between the Crowns, would make them more formidable by Sea, where only we have any Reason to value them.
 In the last mentioned Year a Person of my Acquaintance bought several Hogsheads of Rum in Martinico, as well as Sugar, and carried them to Curasoa. The Rum he bought for six Sol's, which was not 4d. Sterling per Gallon; for a Pistole then, and I think now is, 16 Livres: However so it was, and continued from 1713, to 1716, to my Knowledge, Then too were great Quantities of Money sent from Barbadoes to Martinico, and much greater Quantities brought back from Martinico for it: For as Money went by Tale among the French, and by Weight with the English, all the light Money was carried from the English, and the heavy brought from the French. I have received a good Pistole or Lewis d'Or there in Exchange for 32 Ryals, which I am sure did not weigh two Ounces; so that I am not so much surprized to hear, that that Island wants Money, and insists on Part Money, when they sell their Sugars, as I was then at their Weakness; and indeed if I had ever expected any Complaint against that Trade, I should have thought that our own People should have been the last to have made it. The Trade we carry on there is against their Laws: The Governor there, it is true, hath a Power to admit of Necessaries being imported, at the Request of the Inhabitants; but if he were not constantly bribed by our People, he might see more clearly, and act more for the Good of his Countrey.
 Monsieur Du Quesne, who succeeded General Phelipeaux in the Government of that Place, knew the Interest of his own Countrey very well; yet he was better satisfied that Englishmen should bring Mules to that Island, for every one of which he received 100 Livres, than if their own People had done it, where he could have got nothing at all. Are there any of our People trade there without bribing the Governor? No, not one: Yet after all these Bribes paid and included, I can purchase forty Thousand Pounds of Sugar there for less Money, or less Goods, than I can in Barbadoes, or any of our own Islands; and, if permitted, could bring them to England, and afford them 20 per Cent. cheaper: But as I cannot do that in England, being restrained by Law, I carry those Goods to Holland, or Hambourgh, or Spain, or Portugal or North America, and there can actually gain 20 per Cent. more than I could have done, had I purchased them in Barbadoes. Why, say some People, "This is what we have been proving, and would have you believe this is a real Detriment to England. Had not the Englishmen better sit still, than carry Frenchmens Goods, though they get 20 per Cent. more by them than they can by their own, and leave the French to carry their own Goods themselves? They are able enough, we warrant you, and will soon be used to it. We, with the Assistance of the other Islands, can supply Great Britain, and the Plantations with all they want; though lately indeed we have proved, that the Northern Colonies have taken above half their Rum and Molosses from the French and Dutch, and all that we made besides, except what Rum we sent to England. Now notwithstanding we have really made as much Rum, Sugar, and Molosses upon the Island of Barbadoes, as is possible we ever can do again, because there's not a Foot of Ground unimproved in the whole Island. And though all the other of our Islands have produced as much Rum and Molosses as they were able to do, not wasting a Drop of either, and the Northern People took off all that too, and as much more of the French and Dutch, yet we can supply them ourselves; tho' we prove we all cannot, or have not, produced so much by one half as they have taken, and will want."
 Another Thing hath been advanced which shews equal Strength, namely, that it is a Damage to this Kingdom to purchase Sugar at Martinico, especially with Money. I will suppose that an English Ship hath delivered a Cargoe in Barbadoes, for which her Merchant hath received 4000 Pounds; Sugars are so dear at Barbadoes, he will rather bring the Money home to England, than lay it out in a Commodity, when he apprehends that he shall lose by it; therefore so much Cash which, I will suppose, comes safe home, adds to the Kingdom 4000 Pounds. Another Ship and Man I will suppose under the same Circumstances at Barbadoes; but being informed that Sugars are cheap at Martinico, with his 4000 Pounds goes thither and purchases Sugars; which as he cannot come to England with directly, he carries to Holland, where Sugars are never much dearer, or much cheaper than in England. I will ony suppose in this Case, that he bought his Sugars 10 per Cent. cheaper than he could have done at Barbadoes, which will be sufficient to pay Freight: When in Holland he finds, after deducting 10 per Cent. which will pay his Wages, and Wear and Tear for his whole Voyage, he has just 4000 Pounds left, which he brings to London. Pray, who maintained this Ship the whole Voyage? Certainly the Dutch. And who the other, but the English?
 When I see and hear Propositions which are self evident, controverted and denied, and Impossibilities advanced for Truths. When a Gentleman tells Mr. Britain there are two Places between the Tropics equally distant from your Kingdom, one is inhabited by Mr. French, and the other by Mr. English; they produce the same Commodities, and equal in Goodness. I know you have taken off all Mr. English's Produce for many Years, and when you have had more than for your own Use, you supplied Mr. Holland, who, I have heard you say, paid you very honourably; and that you gained very well by him, he having paid the whole Charges you were at in bringing home, and carrying to him such Produce, which maintained a very great Number of your People very handsomly. Mr. French hath offered to sell you his Produce 30 per Cent. cheaper than Mr. English does, and you may send it to Mr. Holland more directly than you used to do, nay for a great deal less Charge and Expence; and tho' I know he would give you just as much for one as the other, you had better take Mr. English's: Tho' I allow, Mr. Britain, you might get 40 per Cent. more in one Case than the other; yet it is your Interest to trade with Mr. English only, tho' you might get more by 40 per Cent. by Mr. French, and take off all Mr. English's Goods beside. This, I say, hath been maintained, and it remains a Doubt with some, as they say, whether Mr. Britain ought not to do as he is advised; tho' at the same Time too he is well assured that Mr. French designs to undertake that Business himself, and will, in that Case, be always able to undersell him, with Mr. Holland. Yes, there are People who say that Mr. Britain should not take any of those Advantages offered by Mr. French, tho' the Thing is demonstrable, that if he doth not, he will, in a little Time, lose all his Business with Mr. Holland, and be in Danger of wanting such Goods for his own Use and Consumption. What would any one think of Mr. Britain, if by such fine Argument he was persuaded to take their Advice? Why, that he was a Fool, or a Dotard. Yet this is all that they have to say.
 I have so plainly shewn how the French have been supplied with Lumber and Cattle, that I persuade myself, that no Person acquainted in the least with that Part of the Globe, and the Trade thereof, will say, that any Thing which I have advanced, with Regard to their being supplied, for the future, from the Places, and in the Manner I have mentioned, either impracticable, or so much as improbable. I have set forth the Danger of our putting them under the Necessity of improving their Settlements in the Bay of Apalachy and Mississipi; how dangerous the Encrease of their Shipping and Navigation will be to us; the real Damage it will be to us, to lose the Employment of all the Shipping which we now employ in that Trade; or, what might be as properly said, lose the Employment of Twelve or Fifteen Thousand Tons of our Shipping, which the French now pay us for. Is there any one will say that they do not? That would be as absurd as to deny, that Spain doth employ an English Ship, in the following Case: Sen. Don Diego Cadiz acquaints Mr. John London, that he wants Long-Ells, Broad-Cloth, Druggets, Callimancoes, Bays, Fish, Tin, Lead, Wheat, &c. to the Quantity of 500 Tons; and lets him know what Commodities he proposes to pay him with, namely, Wine, Oyl, Cochineal, Wool, and Pistoles, &c. We are to suppose, Mr. London knows the Price current of all these Commodities, in Spain as well as in England; and seeing there's a great Probability of Advantage and Gain to be made, he sends a Ship of proper Burthen, for which, as it is his own Ship, he charges 30 Shillings per Ton Out, and as much Home. When the Spanish Cargoe arrives here, and is disposed of, he finds, after Freight, Commissions, and all other Charges are paid and allowed, he hath neither gained or lost by the Neat Proceeds of this Voyage: But the Freight, tho' it may not be called all clear Profit (yet, supposing and allowing the Maintenance of all the Men which mann'd the Ship, and the Wear and Tear of the Ship included, in the constant Expence of our Nation) I say, that whole Freight would be clear Gains to he Kingdom, viz. Fifteen Hundred Pounds, which undoubtedly we received from Spain. Hence Spain may be properly said to have employ'd an English Ship: Whereas, if just the contrary had happened, that Spain had been the Carrier and Adventurer, had not we paid them the Fifteen Hundred Pounds.
 I will now suppose, that the Gentlemen of our Sugar-Colonies were indulged, and that a Restraint was laid upon all our Shipping trading to the French Colonies, on any Pretence whatever. If the French could produce as much Sugar as they used to do, and send it all to Europe, which, I think, no Body will doubt would be the Case; and that they would send just as much more than they used to do, as our Northern Colonies took from them, and consequently encrease their Shipping on that Score too; they would, in that Case, influence the Markets, or Price of Sugars in England, just as they have hitherto done: For I will defy any Regulation in England, or our Plantations, to persuade Hambourgh, Amsterdam, or Cadiz, to give us more Money for our Sugars, than they will give the French for theirs, while equal in Goodness. Hence, while our Sugar-Colonies produced any Quantity of Sugars more than these Kingdoms and our own Plantations in America consumed, the Prices of Sugar in Europe would not be affected thereby, and consequently not in these Kingdoms, because there is so near a Proportion in the Prices of all Commodities between us and our trading Neighbours: And so far, I confess, I am not able to perceive any Advantages these Gentlemen propose, either to themselves, or to this Kingdom. As far be it from me to suppose they imagine, that as the Consumption of that Commodity is so much encreased in these three Kingdoms, and the Northern Colonies in America, that, communibus annis, we might take off, or be in Want of all that they produced, for our own Use. In that Case, they would have it in their Power to make us pay them their own Price, or be under the Necessity of buying from the French in Europe; for when we have no other Market to go to, may they not serve us just as a famous trading People are reported to serve the World? That is, they let them have just as much Spice as they perceive they consume in Proportion to the Demand of the Consumers: If they have great Quantities remaining, they will rather burn and destroy them, than sell under what they themselves call a good Price. I say, I would not so much as suggest that any Gentlemen could have any such Design; but I would reckon and esteem those People extreamly weak and imprudent, who put it in the Power of any Body, or Colonies of People, to serve them so; and more especially when they, the Parties, seem'd so sollicitous about it themselves. The Northern Colonies would be under the Necessity of paying them whatever they demanded for their Sugar, or be obliged to send to Europe for all that they wanted: And tho' those very Colonies took from our own Sugar Islands all the Rum and Molosses they produced, and tho' one Town in one of those Colonies took at least Ten Thousand Tons of Rum and Molosses, the Produce of one French Island, namely, Martinico, together with the vast Quantities of the same Commodities that were the Produce of Surinam, Guienne, Guadalupe, Granado, Cape Francois, &c. that were imported there, and to all the other Colonies, all of which was but equal to their Consumption and Demand; yet these People in the Northern Colonies, in this Case would, according to the Opinion of those Gentlemen, be deprived of above one Half of those Commodities, which, by such long Use, are become absolutely necessary for them, in carrying on their Indian Trade and Fisheries, two of the most valuable and profitable Trades to this Kingdom, beside what is used in those Plantations where they produce Rice, Pitch and Tar, Tobacco, Wheat, &c. in all which, it is the Interest of this Kingdom that they be produced so cheap, that we may supply other Nations with those Commodities, whereby this Kingdom will reap the whole Profit and Advantage.
 Now, as the Gentlemen of the Islands would have these People in the Northern Colonies entirely dependent on them, and as they are sure they can have none of these Things from any other Quarter, might there not be some Danger, if these Gentlemen were not Men of nice Honour, that they would make the Northern People pay extravagant Prices, perhaps twice as much as they now do, which might entirely destroy the most profitable Trades we now carry on? I will defy any Person to prove that such a Restriction could have any other Effect, than to enrich the People of our Sugar-Colonies at the Expence and Loss of the Trade of this Kingdom, and the Destruction of some, if not many of our Northern Trades and Colonies. What these Gentlemen have done to raise such Expectations as they seem to be possess'd with, I cannot imagine; but whatever Kindness may be intended them, I hope that the People in the Northern Colonies, who are as useful Subjects, will not be distressed, to aggrandize the most wealthy, most opulent, and gayest People in His Majesty's Dominions, even very few about his Courts excepted; nor the Publick Revenue lessened, nor our Trade contracted, to encrease that of our greatest Rivals, while we have or inherit the Name of Britons.
 The Gentlemen of Barbadoes could not perhaps have taken a more improper Time to complain of any Hardships, as they have imported no less into the Port of London in the Year 1730. than 17077 Hogsheads and 256 Barrels of Sugar from that Island only, beside the Quantity imported to the Out-Ports, which I will only allow to be one Third of the Hogsheads imported to London, viz. 5692 Hogsheads, in all 22769 Hogsheads, each Hogshead Weight in Barbadoes 13 Hund will amount to 295997 Hund. which at 1l. 3s. per Hund. in Barbadoes, must amount to 340391l. 11s. no inconsiderable Sum, when we consider the Smallness of that Island, which is not much bigger than the Isle of Wight, and the Number of People (which the Gentlemen of that Island assure us are very few) amongst whom this Sum is to be divided. But when we consider that all this is clear Profit, because those very Gentlemen have already proved before the Honourable Committee, that the Rum and Molosses pays all the Charges of the Plantation; and if we farther allow what we reasonably may, that but one twentieth Part of their Sugar was taken off their Hands by the Northern Colonies, the whole Amount of their Profits in the Year 1730. only, comes to 360306l. 18s. a Sum so prodigious when considered as clear Profit, that it may seem incredible whenever it shall be related, that a few People (very few as they themselves say) were so bad Oeconomists, that they could not live upon such a mighty Income, but petitioned like People in Distress and under the greatest Calamities, for the Means of getting more, from a People unacquainted with their Luxury and Excess, from a People who work and labour hard for their Living, from a People who have but few, if any Slaves, who inhabit Soils less fruitful, who are obliged to be Oeconomists or starve. Yes, such has been the monstrous Effect of the Luxury and bad Oeconomy of some People, that they have been intoxicated to so great a Degree as to persuade themselves, that for only asking they could oblige those who used not only to take all the Commodities they produced off their Hands, but were under the Necessity of taking from others to supply themselves, not to take for the future any such Commodity from any other, whereby they might be capable of making them pay double the Price for all Things which they produced, and the other wanted; the real Consequence of which would be, that the People on our Sugar Islands would get more Money for their Rum and Molosses and Sugar than they used to do. But who would they get it from? Either from our Northern Colonies, or England, or both. If that be the Case, as it undoubtedly is, how shall we be able when they have advanced upon us, to supply those Markets we now supply so cheap? But if we are by this Means to have no more than will just supply our selves and the Northern Colonies, where will the Advantage be to this Kingdom to pay more for their own Consumption? Or what Reason can be given why we should oblige the Northern Colonies to pay more for their Consumption, which in Effect would be taking from the Northern Colonies to give to the Sugar Colonies; none of which could tend to increase the Trade and Navigation of this Kingdom, but on the contrary that Number of Men and Quantity of Shipping now employed to the French and Dutch Sugar Islands (supposing all other Trades sufficiently supplied) would be useless; the King and this Kingdom would lose the Duty, Custom and Excise of a proportionable Quantity of these Commodities, as there could not possibly be so much imported here.
 From what hath been said, I would persuade myself that few who read this will want to be convinced, as I really am, that there is no Occasion for any other Regulation in this Trade than that which I proposed about permitting our Sugar Colonies to carry their clay'd Sugar directly to any Part of Europe South of Cape Finisterre: And if a small Duty not exceeding 5l. per Cent. were laid on all French Goods permitted to be imported into any of our Colonies, and that Money so arising which I would have applied as a Bounty for the sending of Hemp and Flax from them to us: I say such a Duty upon French Goods, together with the Bribes given to Governours, &c. could not make them be afforded cheaper than our own, unless the French could produce much cheaper than our People; and if the last be the Case, we must not long think to supply those Markets, which they can as conveniently do. We have all Sorts of Materials for carrying on of such Business cheaper than the French; namely, Slaves, Provisions, all Manner of Plantation Utensils, Cattle and Lumber; and as we navigate cheaper, our Islands can send their Goods cheaper to Market than any other People can. Is it not owing to our producing Tobacco so cheap, that we sell above 30000 Hogsheads every Year over and above our own Consumption? What is this owing to? Not the Excellence of the Commodity only: Other Countries produce Tobacco which will sell for more Money; but we produce so cheap, and navigate so cheap, that I have great Reason to think if we go on but a little while longer at the low Price it hath held at for some few Years past, that other People will drop that Produce, and we may do in Tobacco what we once did in Sugar, namely, beat out all others, and make them decline the Production of that Commodity; this being once accomplished, as there is some Hopes, the Tobacco Trade will again flourish.
 I have Reason to be of Mr. Gee's Opinion, who says Page 45, in his Book of the Trade and Navigation of Great-Britain considered: "Our Planters are so far from being concerned at the Decay of our foreign Trade, that they have complained too many Sugars were made; and we may conclude will make what Interest they can with their Governors and others, to prevent their making and settling any new Plantations: If they can supply enough for Home Consumption at a great Price, it answers their Purpose. The Island of Barbadoes is very much worn out, and does not afford the Quantity of Sugars as heretofore; and yet the Planters live in great Splendor, and at vast Expence, while the French, under the Remembrance of their Poverty on their first Settlement at Hispaniola, continue to live very frugally, and by their Labour, Industry and Fertility of their Soil, are able to undersell us. The only Places we can think of where we may enlarge our Sugar Plantations are Tobago." To which I would add too the Island of Santa Cruz, which is equal to it at least. The whole Chapter whence I extracted this Part I think deserves as much Consideration as any Part of his whole Book, wherein is contained many just Observations on Trade; and tho' I cannot be of Opinion with him, that the south Parts of Carolina and the Bahama Islands are proper Places for Sugar, because I have been acquainted with the Success of several Experiments there, yet I think the farther settling of the Island of Jamaica to be of the highest Consequence to this Kingdom, which if we neglect, we shall be in Danger to be beat quite out of all foreign Trade by the French: And by that Means the Planters, who shall then remain in our Islands, may make us pay just what they please for their Produce, which seems to be their only Aim by the Petition.
 The Remonstrance of these Gentlemen, with Regard to our Northern Colonies, taking and using French Silks and French Linnens, looks as if they were resolved to render them as odious to this Kingdom, as they already are to the Gentlemen of our Islands. As in all Informations where the Prosecutor is principally concerned in the Consequence, it is generally known, that as far as his own Word will be taken, he seldom fails of making out all he complained of; but by the Happiness of our Constitution, we very often have the Chance of obtaining an impartial Jury, who are to be Judges of Facts, as well as the Credibility of Evidence. Now if a declared Enemy will come and tell a Jury, "Gentlemen, the People in the Northern Colonies in America wear principally French Silks and Linnens; though they can have Silks and Sattins, Callicoes and Muslins, of the Manufacture of India, at least 30, if not 50 per Cent. cheaper than they can have the French Goods: Nay so fond are they of French Linnen, tho' they make Linnen worth 7s. per Ell themselves, that they will wear only French Linnen". Now what impartial Jury, who knew New-England-Men especially, could believe this? A Place where the richest Men follow Business closely, where Industry is principally regarded, where the Luxurious and Effeminate are discountenanced; a Place generally hated by the riotous and debauched Part of Men, because of their rigorous Laws and Customs; a People parsimonious to a Proverb: I say, were this to be related to a Jury of their Vicinage, they might think too much was proved, and shake their Heads at the Informer. If any of these Gentlemen will acquaint the Legislature with any more effectual Means to prevent the Consumption of any foreign Manufactures, either here or in our own Plantations, or shew that sufficient Care is not already taken to prevent such Abuses, as far as the Reason and Nature of the Thing requires, he may do a real Service to this Kingdom, and will then truly deserve the Thanks of every Briton.
 FINIS.   
