A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament, CONCERNING The Naval Store-Bill Brought in last Session. WITH Observations on the Plantation-Trade, and Methods proposed for rendring it more beneficial to Great Britain than hitherto it has been, by promoting the Exports of our Manufactures, and inlarging our Navigation. ------  ------ LONDON, Printed in the Year M.DCC.XX.
  A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament. THE Miscarriage of the Naval StoreBill last Session of Parliament, leading several Gentlemen to enquire how a Bill so very advantageous to the Publick, could be lost; and your Desire of having the true Reasons which put the Merchants upon applying for it, have engag'd me to give you the Trouble of this Letter: in which you have, according to the best of my Knowledge, the true Cause for undertaking it, and also my Thoughts touching the regulating our Trade to the Plantations, in those Particulars you seem to be dissatisfy'd in. 
It is well known that we formerly receiv'd our Supply of Pitch and Tar from Sweden: but the Swedish Merchants knowing that the Best Tarand Pitch was made in their Country, thought they had an Opportunity given them to engross it to themselves, and to send it out in their own Shipping, and sell it to their Neighbours at their own Prices: In order thereunto, they form'd a TarCompany, who engross'd the whole; and several severe Laws were made, that no Makers should sell to any but to them, and that no Ships, either foreign or their own, should load any but for their Account, and by their Order.
 This Monopoly gave great Uneasiness to our Merchants, who thought it a Hardship to be debarr'd bringing home what Pitch and Tar they had occasion for their own Shipping; for losing that Navigation was putting a Number of Ships out of Employment, and consequently paying our Neighbours for Work whilst our People were unimploy'd.
 They made several Complaints, but to no purpose, till the Year 1703. a War being then declar'd with France, and consequently a Royal Navy to be fitted out.
 Upon Examination it was found, that there was not then Pitch and Tar enough in London for an immediate Supply.
 Hereupon several Letters were wrote to Dr. Robinson, now Bishop of London, then her Majesty's Envoy at the Court of Sweden, upon that Occasion: To which the Doctor return'd an Answer from Warsaw, the 4th of August, 1703. to Sir Charles Hedges Secretary of State. This Letter was copy'd out, and given to several Merchants, that they might see how much it was in the Power of the King of Sweden, either to forward the fitting out the Royal Navy of England, or to keep it in Harbour.
 But for better Information, I have transcrib'd the Letter, viz. 
"SIR, I Just now receiv'd your Honour's Letter of July the 6th, with Orders that I should earnestly press the King of Sweden to give such Directions about the Delivery of Pitch and Tar, as that her Majesty may know what she has to trust to therein.
 Upon this Subject I humbly take leave to repeat what I have formerly writ your Honour, that on the 17/27th of March last I transmitted to the King of Sweden her Majesty's Letter about this Business, and sent it with a large Deduction to Count Piper; whereupon on the 20th of March his Majesty writ to the College of Commerce at Stockholm, that they should give all due Assistance to the English Factors, employ'd to buy up that Commodity for her Majesty's Service; that for ready Money they should be supply'd as well with what was wanting for the two former Years, as what was desir'd for this. Which Letter I sent to Stockholm, where it was in due time receiv'd.
 Not long after, Count Piper told me, the Directors of the Tar-Trade had represented it to the King as a great Grievance, that they should be oblig'd to deliver at Stockholm any Pitch or Tar for the Use of the English Navy, for that they could to much more Advantage carry it thither, and sell it themselves.
 I prest the Count very earnestly, that at least the King's Letter, which was already sent, might be comply'd with for this Year; and that if the like was desir'd for the future, we should give them Time for Deliberation, whether they thought fit to gratify the Queen therein or not.
 I had hopes this fair Request would not have met with any Difficulty, but have lately heard from Mr. Jackson it has been wholly rejected, and that the Directors of the Tar-Trade have declared they will export to England and elsewhere all their Pitch and Tar for their own accounts, and that her Majesty's Navy shall be supplied at the Market-Price fixed. This I take to be all her Majesty has to trust to on that side; and my humble Opinion is, no Relief from hence can much mend the matter. 
For as it can hardly be expected any new Order from the King of Sweden (if procured, which is uncertain) can arrive at Stockholm till some time in September, so it is not sure it will then be obey'd more than hitherto, especially considering that by that time the Transportation of Pitch and Tar from Finland to Stockholm will be almost over, and the Directors will have to say, that they have not the Quantity desired.
 It would also fall into a hazardous WinterVoyage, and, in all human appearance, not answer her Majesty's Occasions; wherefore I am much in pain what Resolutions to take.
 To repeat her Majesty's Request to no purpose, and where there may be a tolerable Pretence for not complying with it, seems to me to be very improper; and I humbly hope your Honour will be of that mind.
 Mr. Jackson writes me in his Letter of July 1, that a good Sum was then offer'd to facilitate the Matter, but he had no hope it would succeed; I also believe it will not, the Count Wrede being so little inclined to contribute in any case to a good Intelligence between England and Sweden, and none else having any Authority in these Matters: and therefore if these Endeavours also fail, I cannot perceive her Majesty can with any Certainty be supplied otherwise than either by buying Pitch and Tar of those Directors, at such a Price as they will sell it at in England, or by seizing what they send, whether found by Sea or in Port, and taking it at a reasonable Price.
 The King of Sweden did the same last Year by Lead bound for Dantzick; and our Merchants there writ me, they apprehend it may be so this Year also.
 The Reclaimers, not insisting upon the Advantage they might have had by carrying their Lead to Dantzick, offer'd it at the same Price the Admiralty of Sweden paid for the last Lead they bought; but instead of that were obliged to let fall one sixth, and without any Composition for the bringing up and detention of their Ships.
 Against this may be objected, that thereby the present Occasion may be served, but the Uncertainty become greater for the future.
 To this I can only answer, That the Swedes must always by themselves or others, ship out their Pitch and Tar, and we shall therefore hereafter be at as much Certainty as now. Besides, as those Directors have for many years monopolized, and reserv'd to themselves the Transportation of all Pitch and Tar that goes to Holland, so I judge they intend to do in regard to England also, which if so, would fall hard both on our Traders in that Commodity, and on our Shipping employ'd hitherto in a good Proportion to fetch it: beside that the Price in England would be what the Monopolizers pleased.
 These Inconveniencies will, I hope, be consider'd, and remedied one way or other.
 I am also of opinion, that if the War with Muscovy be of any long Continuance, and Inroads be made into Finland, as most probably will, Sweden will not have such Quantities of Pitch and Tar to send abroad as the Occasions of Europe require.
 Courland furnished some formerly; but while the Swedes are Masters there, none can be expected thence.
 It is but very little, and not good, that Norway yields; and I suppose there is but very little Certainty it can be had from Muscovy.
 What Difficulties there are in making and bringing it from New England, I am not acquainted with, but take it for granted England had better give one third more for it from thence, than have it at such Uncertainties, and in so precarious a manner from other Countries, &c.
 The Swedes were so fond of their new Monopoly of Pitch and Tar, that I am assur'd, by the Commander of an English Merchant-Ship, who was at Stockholm in the Year 1710, that his was the first English Ship which had been there for six or seven Years; and that he made Application by some British Merchants residing there, to the Tar-Company for a Loading of Pitch and Tar, offering them their own Prizes in ready Money: but no Interest could prevail, unless he would give Security not to carry the said Loading to London, Lisbon, or any other Port where the Company had a Factory.
 The People of England soon took the Alarm; the Merchants made strong Application for making those Commodities in our own Plantations, and therefore that matter was brought before the Parliament, who gave the present Encouragement upon importing Pitch and Tar from our Plantations, which soon produced very great Quantities from thence, and they are now so very much encreased, that we receive twice as much as the Nation consumes, and are thereby enabled to export great Quantities to the Streights, Spain, Portugal, Holland, Bremen, and Hamburg.
 'Tis allow'd the Bounty given by the Government amounts to a large Sum yearly; but what we re-export and sell our Neighbours, makes the Kingdom amends for that Disbursement, and it has brought down the Price so low, that both Pitch and Tar are sold with us for less than one third part of the Price we once paid for Swedish Pitch and Tar: And if this way of supplying our selves from our own Plantations had not been found out, no body knows how high the Swedes might have raised their Price upon us, besides the Uncertainty of having it at any Price.
 Upon the King of Sweden's Return from Bender, the Merchants were of Opinion, that his active and warlike Temper could not long sit still, and that a War would soon begin in the Baltick, which would be a great Interruption to our receiving from thence Naval Stores, and also be very injurious to all Manufacturies that depended on them for Materials, but especially to the Iron Manufactury, Timber, &c.
 What was fear'd soon came to pass, a War in the Baltick was begun, great Numbers of our Ships were seiz'd on frivolous Pretences, and carry'd into Swedish Ports, and condemned as Prize, to the unspeakable Damage of the Merchants of this Kingdom; for which no manner of Redress has been obtain'd.
 The Lords Commissioners of Trade being sensible of the great Advantage of supplying our selves with Pitch and Tar from our own Plantations, sent to the Merchants to give them an account what other Naval Stores might be produc'd and brought from thence.
 Their Lordships were told, that if Encouragement was given, and the People put into a proper way to begin, all other sorts of Naval Stores, as well as Pitch and Tar, might be brought from thence; that the Swedes had laid a new Duty on their Iron of near 25 per cent. and that the Interruption of our Trade in the Baltick had greatly distress'd our Iron Manufacturers for want of Iron to carry on their Business; and farther, that the Danes had rais'd their Boards from eight or nine Dollars, to eighteen Dollars per hundred: That Undertakings of this Nature (as in the Case of Pitch and Tar) would at least lower the Prices, and lessen the Imports of Danish and Swedish Commodities, which at present drew from us a most prodigious Sum of Money. And, Lastly, it is manifest, that unless we import about 20,000 Tun of foreign Iron per annum, our Manufacturies cannot be compleatly carry'd on: 
For in the two Years before the War began in the Baltick, viz. 1714, and 1715. (in which Years we had a free Trade with Sweden) above 40,000 Tun was imported; and tho in the two following Years above 23000 Tun was imported, yet that being short of a sufficient Supply, it created terrible Complaints among the Manufacturers.
 Now 20000 Tun of Iron, at 12l. per Tun, comes to 240,000l. and the Boards and Timber we receive at their present advanc'd Price, comes to 200,000l. more; and if they found we could not otherwise be supply'd, they would raise the Price on us.
 And besides all this, the Danes and Swedes had usually the Navigation of all their own Boards and Timber, &c. in their own Shipping; which Employment qualify'd them to breed up Seamen, and consequently, upon any Irruption, to fit out Ships for War and Privateers to annoy our Trade; and if so great an Advantage as bringing the said Commodities from our Plantations could be brought to pass, it would augment our Navigation to the Plantations to more than double what it now is; and not only be an additional Employment to our Ship-Builders, and all others concern'd therein, as well as to our Sailors and Seamen, but increase the Consumption of our Provisions, and other Necessaries for victualling and fitting out the said Ships; and that as our Navigation encreases, that of Sweden and Denmark must of course sink, and our new Supply of Seamen will be the greatest additional Strength imaginable of able and useful Seamen to the Naval Force of this Kingdom; which Sailors will be ready on all Occasions to man out our Fleets.
 That in the Navigation we now carry on to our Plantations, it often happens that the Crops of Tobacco and Sugar, &c. fall short; so that many of the Ships are forc'd to come home dead freighted, and some lie a whole Season for the next Crop, which (if Encouragement was given for bringing Timber, &c. from our Plantations) would, upon such Disappointments, be sure of a Loading.
 These Accounts were receiv'd with very great pleasure by their Lordships; and the Merchants, to promote so good a Work, waited on the Ministry at the Board of Trade, who heard and thorowly examined what the Merchants had to offer.
 And after they had been attended at a great many Meetings, and receiv'd full Satisfaction, that it would be greatly for the Advantage of this Nation to be supply'd with Naval Stores from our own Plantations, and very much enlarge the Exportation of our Woollen and other Manufacturies; a Motion was made for bringing a Bill into the House, which was accordingly agreed to by the House, and pass'd the Commons with a Clause, "That no Person or Persons within the said Plantations, or any of them, shall manufacture any Iron Wares of any kind whatsoever, out of any Sows, Pigs, or Bars whatsoever, under the penalty of   one part to such Person or Persons as shall seize or sue for the same, to be recover'd in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, or Court of Exchequer in Scotland, Courts of Admiralty, or other Courts of Record in the Plantations, &c. the Proof to lie on the Possessor." By this Clause no Smith in the Plantations might make so much as a Bolt, or Spike, or Nail.
 This Clause must indeed have put the Colonies into a most miserable Condition; the Smith being above all other Trades absolutely necessary for carrying on all other Employments: among the rest, that of Ship-Building had by it been utterly destroy'd, tho by this Article they make a great part of their Returns to England for purchasing our Manufactures.
 And there was another Clause added in the House of Lords, "That from and after the 25th day of Decemb. 1719. no Forge going by Water, or other Work whatsoever, shall be erected or kept up in any of the said British Plantations, for the making, working, or converting any Sows, Pigs, or cast Iron, into Bar or Rod-Iron, upon pain, that if any Person from thenceforth erect or keep up, or cause to be erected or kept up any such Forge or other Work for the Use or Purpose aforesaid, such Person so offending, being thereof lawfully convict in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, or in the Court of Exchequer in Scotland, or in the Court of Admiralty, or other Court of Record held in such Plantation where the Offence shall be committed, at the pleasure of the Informer, shall, for such his or her first Offence, suffer six Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize, and for every other such Offence shall suffer six Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize; and all Governors, or Commanders in Chief of the said Plantations, and every of them, now and for the time being, are hereby strictly requir'd not to suffer such Forge, or other Work to be erected or kept up in any of the said Plantations within their respective Governments, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning hereof; and if any of the said Governors or Commanders in Chief shall willingly or wittingly offend or be negligent in doing his Duty herein, upon Complaint and Proof made thereof before his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or such as shall be by him or them thereunto authoriz'd and appointed, by the Oath of two or more credible Witnesses, the said Governor or Commander in Chief, so neglecting or offending, shall be remov'd from his Government."
 This second Clause must have ruin'd all those Iron-Works in the Colonies, to the great Loss of the Proprietors of them, and given the French a much fairer Handle to tempt them into their Settlements, which join to ours, than the Scarcity of Iron has given them to intice away our Artificers.
 Which being duly consider'd, those Persons that were sollicitous for the Benefit of the Publick, desir'd the Bill should be dropt that Session, that the Members of both Houses might have time fully to inform themselves of the Advantages thereof.
 Those Gentlemen who chiefly oppos'd this Undertaking, were concern'd in Iron-Works, who since the Interruption of the Trade with Sweden, have rais'd their Iron to an extraordinary Price: They did all they could to obstruct the Bill; they reported it would hinder the Exportation of wrought Iron to the Plantations, that it was only a Trick of some Stock-Jobbers, and that it was carry'd on by some Persons that had a Grant from the Crown of some part of Nova Scotia.
 All which were mere groundless Insinuations; for there never was a Design of making a Stock of it, nor were any Stock-Jobbers ever concern'd in the solliciting it, much less did any Person concern'd whatsoever think of a Grant from the Crown; neither was Nova Scotia the Place intended for carrying on the aforesaid Business, or thought to be proper for the said Undertaking.
 But as the People of New England, New York, Pensylvania, Carolina, &c. are under great Necessities for English Manufactures, and an Incapacity of providing Commodities to pay for them, has prevented the English Merchants from sending them those large Quantities that might be a sufficient Supply; and as inevitable Necessity has put them upon manufacturing for themselves; therefore this new Employment of providing Naval Stores, was propos'd to take them off the Manufactures that interfere with ours.
 But making a Monopoly or Stock of it, would utterly destroy the very Intentions of the Naval Store-Bill, force the Planters to continue to manufacture for themselves, and prevent the exporting our Manufactures thither.
 Those Joint-Stocks or Companies, that have been erected for carrying on a Trade to the Plantations, have been found very prejudicial, and their Capitals have been quite traded away, and entirely lost to the Proprietors.
 Upon examining our Exportation of wrought Iron to the Plantations, it appears that the same amounts to about 1300 Tun yearly; the full half of it goes to Jamaica, Barbadoes, and the other Sugar-Islands.
 But if we allow seven hundred Tun to the Plantations on the Continent, about one half of that goes to Virginia and Maryland, where they have better Employment than to set hands to the making Iron Wares, and make sufficient Returns for themselves.
 Therefore it may be concluded, that these Plantations, as well as the Sugar-Islands, will never concern themselves in making Iron-Manufactures; so that the whole that can be in danger is the remaining 350 Ton.
 Now the Manufactury of all this 350 Ton, allowing full 12s. per Hundred Workmanship, comes but to 4200l. a Sum not worth mentioning.
 'Tis then very obvious, there was no reason for the aforesaid Oppositions.
 If these Gentlemens Care had been for the Good of the Publick, why were the Woollen, Linen, and Leather Manufacturies, Hats, &c. neglected?
 Is it not as much the Interest of England to preserve the Exportation of those Manufacturies, as that of Iron?
 But if our Plantations, that have thirteen or fourteen Iron-Works employ'd in making Bar or Pig-Iron, were encouraged to bring it home, it would not only secure the Trade we now have with them, but enlarge it.
 This Rise of Iron is a very severe Tax on Waggoners, Carriers, and Farmers, viz. on the Tire of their Waggons, Carts, Plough-Shares, and other Iron-Works.
 It is three Half-pence or two Pence per HorseShoe upon all large Waggon-Horses and CoachHorses in and about London, and a Penny on the least Shoe that is made; and I suppose it may be near the same in other Parts of the Kingdom.
 'Tis also a most prodigious Discouragement to all our Ship-building.
 We can't expect to make Anchors, Bolts, or any other Iron-Works, for the Streights, Spain, or Portugal, nor find a Market abroad for our IronRails, Gates, and other nice Iron-Works; the Iron being so much cheaper in Holland, Germany, Flanders, &c. will cause our Workmen to go thither to supply foreign Markets.
 But tho we have as good Opportunities of making Iron as any Place in the Universe by our own People in our own Plantations, the Profit of which would be spent among us; yet we must not improve them: A Circumstance hard to be accounted for!
 If it had not been for this Restraint upon the Iron-Trade, we might have had the fitting out of our own Guinea Ships; but the Dutch underselling us in Guns, Knives, and other Iron-Works, have thereby ingrossed the fitting out whole Cargoes.
 It must be owned the Distress of the Poor Manufacturers is very great: The Dearness and Scarcity of Iron has thrown abundance of them out of work; and those that continue to work, have such large Deductions out of their usual Wages, that they meet with great Difficulties to find Bread for their Families.
 The Iron-Manufacture is said to be the third in the Kingdom; and that not less than 200,000 Persons are employ'd in it.
 The Waste and Destruction of the Woods in Warwick, Stafford, Worcester, Hereford, Monmouth, Glocester, and Shrop, Shires, by these Iron-Works, is not to be imagined.
 The Scarcity of Wood is already grown so great, that where Cord-Wood has been sold at six or seven Shillings per Cord within these few Years, it is now risen to fourteen or fifteen Shillings; and in some Places is all consumed. 
The Iron-Works are got among the Woods in Glamorganshire, and have begun on the small Quantity in Pembrokeshire, which can stand but a little time before them.
 And if some Care is not taken to preserve our Timber from these consuming Furnaces, there will not be Oak enough left to supply the Royal Navy, nor Shipping for the Use of the Merchant, to the great Discouragement of Ship-building and Navigation, upon which the Safety and Figure of these Kingdoms, as a Maritime Power, depends.
 It is generally allowed, that within these sixty Years, Ireland was better stored with Oak-Timber than we are; but several Gentlemen from hence, as well as those residing there, set up Iron-works, which in a few Years swept away the Wood to that degree, that they have not small Stuff left to produce Bark for their Tanning, nor Timber for common and necessary Uses.
 Their Distress is so great, that they are forced to send to England and elsewhere for Bark, and to Norway, &c. for Building-Timber, and suffer their large Hides to be exported to Holland, Germany, and Flanders, where (to the loss of that Manufactury) they are tanned: and every Body is sensible of the Damage it must be to a Kingdom to lose their Manufacturies, and how difficult it is to regain them.
 For if we consider Manufacturies and Navigation in general, we shall find that Kingdoms and States are more or less rich, as they have a greater or lesser Share of Manufacturies and Navigation.
 If we take a view of Denmark, Switzerland, Bohemia, and other Parts of Germany, we shall find the common People so miserably poor, that they think themselves happy when they have an Opportunity of listing for Soldiers, and are always desirous of hiring out their Troops to be maintain'd by their Neighbours, and to receive the small Returns of Money they are capable of sending home out of their Pay. 
If we likewise take a view of our own Kingdom, we shall find our Trade and Riches came in but very slowly till our Plantations began to be settled; and as they throve, our Trade and Riches encreased, our Lands rose in value, and our Manufacturies encreased also.
 And there are Reasons enough to be assigned for it, which I may at a proper time more fully demonstrate.
 'Tis generally agreed, the Sugar and Tobacco Plantations only, employ 300 Sail of Ships, which may be allowed to find Employment for 6000 Sailors; and they and their Families are all maintained by this Navigation.
 Allowing each Ship to be worth 2000l. fitted out to Sea, there must be 600,000l. of the National Stock employ'd in this Shipping, beside their Cargoes.
 The Advantages of victualling such a Number of Ships must be very considerable.
 The Dependants on this Trade, and their Families, are all supported and maintained thereby; such as Ship-Carpenters, Joiners, Caulkers, Sailmakers, Rope-makers, Anchor-Smiths, Blockmakers, Ship-Chandlers, Bakers, Brewers, Butchers, Lightermen, Wharfingers, Porters, and Carmen, beside many other Employments.
 And further, let those who are versed in Politicks, consider how much the natural Bulworks of this Island are maintained, repaired, and augmented by so great a Number of the best of Sailors.
 It has been affirmed by some very good Judges, that before the Settlement of our Plantations, we paid 400,000l. yearly for Brazil Sugars; that we paid the Spaniards 100l. per Ton for Logwood, and an extravagant Price for a great many other Commodities, with which we are now supplied by our own Plantations.
 And Sir Josiah Child tells us, that in his time Brazil Sugars were beat down by the English Sugars from 7 or 8l. to 50s. or 3l. per Hundred; and the Quantity imported from the Brazils from 100,000 or 120,000 Chests, to 30,000 Chests.
 And by another Author we are also told, that Brazil Tobacco stood us from 4s. to 8s. per Pound.
 If we consumed but half the Quantity of Sugar then that we now do, and it cost us 7 or 8l. per Hundred, it must stand the Nation in a Sum greatly exceeding 400,000l. yearly.
 And had the Consumption of Tobacco been then as great as it now is, it would have amounted to a Sum that would exceed my Calculation.
 But now those Colonies do not only supply us with all the Tobacco and Sugar we consume, but send us above the Value of 500,000l. yearly for Re-exportation, beside Ginger, Cotton, Wool, Indigo, and many other Commodities, out of which great Numbers of Gentlemen and Planters who reside with us, are maintained; and very large Sums of Money laid out in Lands in this Kingdom, which has exceedingly raised the landed Interest.
 Sir Josiah Child computes, that every white Man in the Sugar Plantations employs four Persons at home to provide him and his Negroes with Wearables, Houshold-Goods, and all other Necessaries for carrying on the Work of the Plantations: And all agree that every Person employ'd in Manufacturies for Exportation, adds a considerable yearly Value to the publick Stock of this Nation.
 But notwithstanding all the Advantages we receive from the Plantations, I am fully of opinion that that Trade might be so improved as to be twice as good to this Kingdom as it now is.
 And that a little Care to put the People there into a way to send us their Commodities, and Productions, would cause them to throw away their Woollen, Linen, and other Manufacturies that interfere with this Kingdom, as Virginia has done upon the late Act for encouraging the Exportation of Tobacco.
 And as soon as those Favours are granted them, and they have made some progress therein, I doubt not but we shall see a new Scene opened, additional Manufacturies carrying on in Great Britain; and Gentlemen would find new Houses built upon their Estates, Towns encrease, and Lands rise about them; Corn, Cattle, and all sorts of Provisions, go off quick, and at a better Price: for where Employment is to be found, Workmen will resort, and Numbers of People will create Consumption.
 I know several People are very fond of shipping out Corn, and we allow a considerable Bounty to encourage it: And it is very well to have a Market when we have more Corn than we can spend. But few consider the Advantages of sending abroad our Woollen and other Manufacturies made of Materials within our selves.
 If we compare the National Advantages of shipping out Corn, and also of our Woollen Manufacturies, we shall find the sending out the Value of 100l. in Woollen Manufacturies to be full as good as sending out the same Value in Corn.
 For both Corn and Wool are our natural Product; and Manufactury is the Labour of our own People, as well as Plowing, Sowing, Reaping, and Threshing.
 Ploughing, Threshing, &c. can only be performed by able Men; but in woollen Manufacturies Women and Children find Employment, and are useful in carrying it on as well as Men: Every Body may be employ'd in Manufacturies, but few in Tillage.
 It's thought we export above twenty times the Value in Manufacturies, that we possibly can do in Corn.
 The foreign Markets for Corn are very uncertain and precarious; but our Exportation of Manufacturies may be render'd more steady and certain, and Encouragement may open new Markets.
 Our great Care and Study therefore ought to be to enlarge the Exports of our Manufactures, where there is so much room for Improvement; but more especially to our own Plantations, where it is in our power to enable them to purchase all their Clothing of us.
 'Tis the Prudence of the Dutch to draw all the ingenious Artists and Manufacturers they can into their Dominions.
 They also take care that all Materials for Manufacturies be render'd as cheap as possible: And this Fore-sight of theirs has enabled them to do those Wonders by Trade which they have done. And the French are now vigorously persuing the same Methods.
 And it is the Opinion of a great many judicious Gentlemen, that if we, in like manner, endeavour'd to draw in Artists and Manufacturers into this Nation, we might very easily consume the Corn among ourselves which we now export: That one Bushel of Wheat spent at home by additional Manufacturers is of six times the advantage to the Nation as a Bushel shipped abroad; because in spending one Bushel of Wheat at home, there is five times the Value spent in Flesh, and all sorts of Provisions, Beer, &c. that is to say, the Value of one hundred thousand Pounds spent in Wheat, would create the Consumption of five hundred thousand Pound of the other Products of the Earth, beside the Addition of Clothing, House-rent, &c.
 But instead of a Bounty, or the Duty drawn back on wrought Iron, it pays  per Cent. outwards, and 20 per Cent. Custom inwards.
 There is a very great Duty on several sorts of Dying-Stuffs, which makes our woollen Manufactures go dear abroad; a great Excise on Soap, Candles, Leather, &c. And if those Duties are not taken off, it is greatly to be fear'd the Dutch and French will have an Advantage over us in Manufacturies, and draw away many of our Manufacturers also.
 As I have already mention'd the Advantage we receive by the Sugar and Tobacco-Plantations, I shall now shew the Difficulties some of the Colonies are under for want of being put into a way to make Returns, particularly New England.
 Their great Delight is to wear English Manufactures, but the Difficulty of coming at them is very great; hitherto they have found no Silver Mines, and have never been put into a way to provide any thing to send us, that the Country produces, but Pitch and Tar, Turpentine, and Ships of their own building. Those Articles will go but a little way towards clothing such a Number of People, and therefore they are forced to visit the Spanish Coast, where they pick up any Commodity they can traffick for, to carry Lumber and Provisions to the Sugar-Plantations, and to the Logwood-Cutters at Campeachy, and there exchange them for the Product of those Islands, &c. which they generally send to us; they are forced to catch Fish, to make Pipe and BarrelStaves, &c. which they send to Portugal, Spain, or the Straits; and lastly to build a great Number of Ships, the only Manufactury (except Turpentine, Pitch, and Tar) in that Country, that they can send us, which they often sell with their Cargoes in Portugal, and other Parts of Europe, as well as in England.
 By these Methods they make a shift to scrape up about 150,000l. per annum, to pay for the Goods they buy of us. 'Tis almost incredible that they should be capable of raising so great a Sum; and yet if they could find out Methods to raise more Money, their Demands for our Manufactures for their Supply would be vastly greater; for want of which they are forced to fall on the Woollen, Linen, Iron, and Leather Manufacturies, or any other wherein their Servants or Negroes can be serviceable to them.
 This hath given great Uneasiness to the Manufacturers and Merchants, as well as Sailors of this Kingdom, and occasion'd many to say, that they strive to carry away our Trade; that they have, great and small, near 300 Sail of Ships in NewEngland alone.
 But the Persons, who have received such Notions, ought to consider, that this Number consists mostly of small coasting Sloops; and that as to their larger Ships, the Merchants of Great Britain are Owners in great Part; and from these Ships, and their Cargoes, is produc'd all the Money we receive for our Manufactures.
 If they had more Ships, and as well employ'd, that could be sold with their Cargoes in Europe, the Demand for our Manufactures would be so much the more enlarg'd, as the Opportunity of making Returns amounts to.
 But if they had Encouragement, we might receive all our Naval Stores from them, which we now have from Sweden, Norway, &c. and for which we are forced to pay in Gold and Silver.
 For our own Plantations abound with divers sorts of Wood, viz. Gum-Wood, Mehoggony, Wild Cherry, Chestnut, Cypress, Cedar, Wallnut, Hickery, Oak, as well as the common sorts of Wood which we receive from Sweden, Norway, and Germany; which (if the Duties were taken off) might be imported cheaper than we have them from thence. They have made excellent Pot-ashes, they produce very good Flax, have rais'd very great Quantities of it, and have begun on Hemp; which grows so high on rich Grounds, that 'tis difficult to dress it at full Length.
 In Carolina they produce the best Rice in the World; and if that Trade was well directed, it might supply Portugal, Spain, and Italy with it, as well as the other Parts of Europe.
 They have extraordinary rich Copper-Mines: and if search was made, 'tis thought some of a better nature may be found.
 They have Iron-Stone all along the Continent, from the Southermost Parts of Carolina, to the Northermost Part of New England, in great Plenty; some of it, upon Trial, has made extraordinary good tough Iron, and very good Steel.
 No Part of the World abounds more with prodigious Quantities of Wood, nor has more Rivers and Streams than that Part of the Continent. There is so much Wood, that the great Charge of the Planter is to clear the Ground.
 And as no one Undertaking consumes so much Wood as Iron-Works, if they were erected, the Land would be cleared of the Wood, the Air purified, the Ground made fit for Hemp and Flax, and the best Timber might be preserv'd for bringing home. 
In charcoaling the Wood, there will be a very good Opportunity of drawing Pitch and Tar out of the Pine-Trees; and no Wood, according to the best Observation, makes better Charcoal for Iron-Works: and all this without any other Charge than providing Fewel for the IronWorks, such a Dependency have these Operations one upon another.
 And as there are so many Circumstances that attend the making Iron in our own Plantations, if proper Encouragement was given, it may be brought to a very great Perfection, and such Quantities made, as to exceed in value any other Product of our Plantations.
 Iron is a Commodity of universal Use, staple, and certain in all Parts of the known World; consequently as much to be valued as Silver or Gold; a Commodity that will be carried every where as Ballast, at little or no Charge.
 And whereas the Dutch do supply Portugal, the Straits, and Turkey with great Quantities, if we could be so happy as to have a full Supply from our own Plantations, either by Adventurers from hence, who would lay out their Estates in erecting Iron-Works, or in Exchange for the Woollen or other Manufactures which we export to those Places; we should not only ballast our Ships with Iron, but export great Quantities, not only all over the Straits and Turkey, but even to India and Africa; and soon become Masters of a good part of the Trade.
 And as we were once dependant on the Swedes for Pitch and Tar, we must remain so still to them for Iron, as we must to Norway and to them for Boards and Timber, and to Muscovy for Hemp, unless some Care is taken to relieve us from such a Dependency: For tho 'tis probable we shall soon have a sufficient Supply of Iron from Sweden, yet upon any new Rupture with any of them, our Manufacturers may be put to the same Difficulty as they have lately been under.
 And as the Czar has all the principal Ports from whence we receive our Supply of Hemp in his own Hands, it is more than probable that he will endeavour to play the same Game that Sweden did with their Pitch and Tar, viz. oblige us to receive it by his own Shipping, and at his own Prizes. Possibly this was what was aimed at in the Projects sometime since offer'd to England, France, and Holland, one after another; and for the same Reason might be rejected by them all. It is therefore very dangerous for us to depend on a Supply of Hemp from those that endeavour to get from us a part of our Trade and Navigation.
 'Tis said the French have transported above 20,000 People to their new Settlements of Missisippi within this little time: and as they are so sensible of the Advantage of Colonies, and can by degrees compass all their Designs (witness Hispaniola, Cape Breton, and Newfoundland) I believe almost every Body will agree 'tis now time to look about us: And since they go on with such extraordinary Vigour in transporting great Numbers of People, and give so great Encouragement to those who will transport themselves thither, and have made such strong Forts all along the River Canada, and on the back of our Settlements, it will be well if they admit our Limits to come near them.
 We indeed claim a vast Tract of Land to the Westward of Carolina, Virginia, &c. but we find the French have brought their Settlements already close to the back of ours. The late French King having granted all the Lands bordering on the English Settlements of Carolina, &c. to the Sieur Crozat, in which the River Avabash is included, which runs close to the Apalatinan Mountains, (Hills that run above the Heads of those Rivers which have their Course thro Carolina and Virginia,) Places most convenient to build Forts for protecting the Skin-Trade, and vending our Woollen and other Commodities; 'tis thought some valuable Mines are contain'd in those Mountains. If they should seize them, or lay hold of part of them, and afterwards on the Heads of the Rivers leading into the Virginian Sea, and desire to carry their Navigation that way, it may in time create Misunderstandings.
 In my humble Opinion, the surest way to preserve our Claims and Properties to our Colonies, is by peopling them, as the French do theirs; and building Forts and Settlements on our Frontiers, as they do on theirs. Their Navigation is so far up, both the Rivers Canada and Missisippi, that, notwithstanding the great care taken, they will often want Supplys: and our Plantations lying all along the Sea-Coasts, with the River Canada and Missisippi on our Backs; and their Settlements being on those Rivers, and about the great Lakes, ours and theirs will be so near, that it will be impossible to prevent their supplying themselves with Woollen and other Goods from our Frontiers.
 There is no doubt but the Missisippi Company will give their own People all the Encouragement that can be thought on; for 'tis said a great number of Negroes will be distributed among them at the Company's Charge, and that experienced judicious Persons will be appointed to examine and consider what Productions may be raised from the several Parts of the Country, and proper Directors appointed to see that the People go on regularly in raising what every Part is most capable of producing, till the Planters shall have Skill and Experience to conduct their own Affairs, and the Tract is perfectly beaten out, and the People settled in it.
 If the French Settlements have all these Encouragements, and ours should be debarr'd making Iron, and not encouraged to send it home in Pig or Bar, nor admitted to send home their Boards and Timber, and the other Commodities which I have already mention'd, 'tis easy to judge by the Artificers they get from us, what Draughts they will make out of our Plantations, for there is not so much as a Hedge between us and them to prevent it.
 Our greatest Security, and the readiest way to enrich this Nation, is to give the Plantations Encouragement towards the producing those Commodities before-mention'd, and any other that may be of advantage to us and them. No doubt People from all Parts, who are now made uneasy, would be glad to remove to such desirable Countries as our Plantations are, much more desirable than those of the French, because the Navigation is not attended with the Difficulties of sailing some hundreds of Miles, up dangerous Gulphs, before they can come at their Port.
 A great many Families have transported themselves from several Parts of Germany, Poland, &c. to our Plantations; and a little Encouragement would draw great numbers thither.
 'Tis certain a very great Treasure may be gain'd to this Nation by peopling our Colonies: It is therefore to be wished, that some Countenance was given to several sorts of laborious People, both in Germany and Switzerland, who are but indifferently treated in their respective Countries, to transport themselves thither.
 I think it will sufficiently appear, that the Encouragement of making Pitch and Tar in the Plantations has made us independant for those Commoditys; that now we have no need to bribe any Ministry, nor supplicate any Prince in the World to supply us with them  for our Gold and Silver (Vid. Dr. Robinson's Letter before recited.); also that our Plantations can effectually supply us with all other naval Stores; and that if they had Encouragement to provide Iron, Hemp, Flax, Boards and Timber, we should be effectually supplied with all those Commodities, not only for our own Use, but for Reexportation; and that as soon as the Planters had other Employments to turn their hands to, they would presently abate sending Pitch and Tar in so great Quantities; and what they did send would be as good as that from Sweden, as I am credibly informed some of it is which is lately arrived. 
And not only so, but more Commodities and Goods to greater value, may be brought home for Re-exportation than what we now re-export of the Product of our Sugar and Tobacco Plantations, and that the additional Navigation to our Plantations will be more than double what it now is.
 That as the great Obstruction to the Naval Store-Bill was the Fear of injuring our IronManufacturys, nothing can hinder it so much as preventing their sending us what they can raise from their natural Product and Soil.
 For as they have 14 or 15 Iron-works, as I have already hinted, if they can't have liberty to bring hither Bar or Cast-Iron, &c. they will want Effects to purchase Iron and other Manufactures with us, and consequently must be forced to work up their own Iron, &c. whereas if they might export hither those Commodities I have mention'd, they might barter them for manufactured-Iron, and other Manufactures.
 But because 'tis pretended that the Iron Manufacturies of this Kingdom might be damaged, and our Exportation of Iron to the Plantations lessen'd, by making Iron there; and that therefore the great Advantages that would come both to us and the Plantations by the Naval Store-Bill must be lost:
 I shall, before I conclude this Letter, propose a Method that I hope will sufficiently satisfy the Gentlemen that are really under those Apprehensions, and preserve not only that Manufactury to us, but also shew how our Navigation may be managed so as to prevent the Inconveniencies which are alledged we receive from the New-England Ships, and leave to them the same Advantages which we enjoy in our Navigation.
 But I would first say something of the Advantages the Colonies will receive by turning their hands from the Manufactures which interfere with ours, and employing themselves in providing the aforesaid Commodities for sending home.
 That which has enabled our Tobacco-Plantations to outdo the Tobacco-Planters of Europe, is the Cheapness of their Land, and the cheap Work of their Negroes. They have their Lands at a small Quit-rent, which will enable them, when once got into the way of it, to outdo Russia it self in the Cheapness of their Hemp and Flax, as it has done in Tobacco. They are now at a very great Charge to clear their Ground of Wood, which when cut down is of no manner of use to them; but a small Addition to their present Charge, would make it into Charcoal or Pot-ashes.
 The Russians bring their Hemp and Flax, which is shipt off at Archangel, above 500 Miles by LandCarriage, and above a thousand Miles down the Dwina, before 'tis put on board: But our Plantations lie all along the Continent, near the SeaCoast, and there are every where Rivers navigable into the Country. Geat part of the Land is very rich, and fit for Hemp and Flax; and 'tis a much easier Navigation from thence to England, than it is from Archangel. 
Hemp and Flax require very rich and strong Land, which must be often dunged; but in the Plantations, when it has bore 2 or 3 Crops, their Land is of so small value, they can afford to lay it down till it recover itself, and break up fresh Ground. By these Methods the Productions of the Land will soon stock them with Hemp, Flax, Boards, and Timber, which will enable them to purchase our Woollen and other Manufactures.
 And when this Privilege is given, many of them would be content that a Bounty was allow'd to import their Wool into England, as well as their Hides, because every thing (as they say) would help to pay for our Manufactures, which are ready prepared for them.
 This Method would contribute to enrich this Nation; and it will not only be a Happiness to us to have their Wool to manufacture, but it will take it out of their way.
 The Blanket-Makers of Whitney will be glad of the worst of it, and work it up into Blankets, and send it them again wrought up, which at this time is a very great Trade to the Plantations.
 We should by this means transfer the Employment we give the Danes and Swedes (which we pay dearly for in Gold and Silver) to our own People in the Plantations, and pay them for their Labour and Productions with the Labour and Manufactures of this Kingdom; and at the same time have the whole Navigation to our selves.
 In the third Year of the late Queen's Reign, a Bill pass'd for allowing a Bounty on Hemp imported from the Plantations, which was again renew'd in the twelfth Year of her Reign for eleven Years longer, which time draws towards a Conclusion; and as no Persons have undertaken to import any Hemp into this Kingdom all this time, 'tis not likely they should now begin, unless there be a farther time granted for allowing a Bounty.
 And whereas there was no notice taken of Flax in that Bill, if the same Bounty was allowed on Flax as on Hemp, it might have induced the Planters to sow both together; for they are Commodities sowed in the same sort of Ground, and order'd in the same manner: If one fails, the other may hit. They are both naval Stores, Flax being used in making Sail-Cloth.
 But beside, it will be of extraordinary advantage to the Nation: For the Lands in Great Britain being (as I have already observed) too dear for sowing Flax, and therefore the Quantity sowed not allowing work for above four or five Months in the Year, many thousand of People both in the North of England and Scotland are unimploy'd all the rest of the Year.
 'Tis by such Misfortunes that People learn idle Habits, and with difficulty are brought to work again: But if they were kept at full Work, they would make twice the Quantity of Linens that are now made. And the extraordinary Plenty of Flax that might be produced by this Encouragement, would give opportunity to many thousands of People, now out of Employment, to fall into this Manufactury; and we need not go far for a Market, ours being the best in Europe.
 Where care is taken by the State to put their People into proper Methods, many fair Opportunities of enriching Kingdoms are gained. 
The late French King, stirred up by the powerful Opposition he met with upon his invading the Provinces of Holland, found that Treasure, and not Largeness of Territory, was what enabled the Dutch to oppose him; that their Riches arose from their Manufactures, Trade, and Navigation: and therefore he determined to follow their Example.
 The first Undertaking was to tempt skilful Master-Workmen and Manufacturers from other Countries.
 The Golden Bait was laid before Vanroby, a Dutchman, who took it; and in consideration of a large Sum advanc'd him, and Liberty of Conscience to him and all his Descendants, and a Minister of his own Persuasion allowed to preach to them, he removed to Abbeville, with a Train of Workmen. And 'tis remarkable that this was done about the same time that the French King persecuted his own Subjects for their Religion.
 By this means the Woollen Manufactury was established there, and spread it self into several other Parts of France; and divers other valuable Improvements were made in Trade, not only in providing Materials for Manufacturies on the very best Terms, and enlarging their Navigation, but in peopling their Colonies abroad.
 The Spirit of Trade that then began among them, has continued ever since, and seems now to rise higher than ever.
 Their stealing away some of our Weavers to settle at Tankerville so lately, and several other Attempts which they have succeeded in, shows how necessary it is to be upon our guard, and, if possible, to keep our Workmen to our selves; for if the French Emissaries can come at them, there will be no Encouragements wanting to tempt 'em away.
 And the Emperor is now trying to establish Woollen Manufacturies in his hereditary Dominions: and the Methods taken to restrain and obstruct the Consumption of our Woollen Manufactures in those Countries, amount to a Prohibition upon several sorts of them; tho, at the same time, our greatest Supply of Linen is from his Provinces of Silesia, Bohemia, and Moravia, which amount to a vast Sum yearly.
 If part of that Money could be saved, by finding Employment for more of our Poor in the Linen Manufactury, I hope it would be very pleasing to every Body: and I am humbly of opinion, that allowing a Bounty on Hemp and Flax from the Plantations would effect it.
 Indeed all the Naval Stores proposed in that Bill are Commodities which we are forced to have from abroad, for which we pay mostly ready Mony.
 I know several People have a very mean Opinion of the Linen Manufactury; but that must proceed from want of knowing it better.
 The Manufactury of Linen may be altogether as profitable as that of Wool.
 Some Persons both in Somersetshire and Dorsetshire, that threw off the Woollen Manufactury at the Revolution, and went upon making Linens, have found the Advantages thereof.
 As we cannot have Flax and Hemp grow but on our best Lands, and many Landlords not allowing their Tenants the Liberty of sowing either Flax or Hemp, because it impoverishes the Land; for this reason there is but a poor Progress made at home in that Manufactury, to what it is capable of.
 The Flax is inconsiderable in value to what it is when made into Cloth: A Pound manufactured may be worth a whole hundred Weight of Flax.
 And a Bounty given the People in the Plantations, is but a mere Trifle towards their Labour; the Extent and Cheapness of their Lands, and cheap Labour of their Slaves, will enable them in a little time to afford it us much cheaper than we can raise it our selves, or import it from Russia or any other foreign Market. The Pitch and Tar already mention'd is a full Proof thereof; and the People in the Plantations want nothing but a little Direction and Encouragement to put them to work. 
It is a hard Matter to turn People from the Employment, to which they have been accustom'd, to a new one; and as Necessity put the Inhabitants of the Plantations on Manufacturies for their Clothing, &c. if this new Employment be provided for them, some Care ought to be taken to turn their Industry to enter upon it: and therefore some gentle Restraints may be laid on those Manufacturies which too much interfere with ours. And as the great danger we are to fear is from the cheap Labour of their Negroes, they ought to be entirely excluded from being imploy'd in any Manufacturies.
 For no body will think it reasonable, when a Nation has spared her People to settle a Colony, that their Arts, Mysteries, and Skill in Manufacturies, should be transmitted to the Slaves of those Planters.
 Therefore as they are only intended for Planting and doing the Drudgery of the Plantations, they ought not to work at any sort of Iron-Manufactury, further than making into Pigs; nor be admitted to weave, or comb, or spin any Wool, nor to spin or weave any Flax for Linen-Cloth; nor to work up, or be admitted to manufacture Hats, Stockings, or Leather.
 And if after a certain time allowed for notice, any Negroe or Slave is found working at any of the aforesaid Manufacturies, 'tis proposed that his Master or Owner shall forfeit his Right and Title to him or them, and the said Negro or Negroes shall be transported out of all the Plantations on the Continent to some of the Sugar Islands, or to the Spanish Plantations, there to be sold, -- -- for the Benefit of the King, and -- -- for the Benefit of the Informer.
 And there is reason to believe the Planters will be content to have their Negroes excluded from working at any of the aforesaid Manufacturies, provided they may imploy them in raising Flax and Hemp, making Iron, Boards, &c. and be sufficiently encouraged to send them hither; and that they will consent to any further Regulation that may be thought necessary to prevent their interfering with the Manufacturies of Great Britain.
 It is therefore proposed, That every Master-Weaver, Smith, or Comber, in the Plantations, shall be obliged to appear before the Governour of each Province, there to register his Name and Place of Abode, and take a Licence, and pay for the Liberty of exercising his Trade, and to leave a faithful Account of the Number and Names of the Journeymen he employs: And every such Journeyman shall be obliged to appear before the Governour, and register his Name, and take out a Licence for working with such a Master, and shall pay for a Licence; which Licence shall continue for one Year, and no longer; but if he changes his Master, he shall be obliged to change the Register of his Place of Abode to that of the Person he is going to reside with.
 The Governour of each Province shall be oblig'd to transmit a faithful Account of the Number of Master-Smiths, Master-Weavers, Master-Combers, Number of Looms, and Number of Journeymen employed in each Manufactury: which Account shall be every Year transmitted to the Lords of Trade and Plantations, with an exact Account of all New-comers and of their last Place of Abode.
 By this means the Lords of Trade will always have an Opportunity of seeing the Increase or Diminution of the Manufacturies of the Colonies, which may be encouraged or depressed, according to their Wants, or the Danger of their too much interfering with us.
 This Method will be far from destroying the Iron-Works, or ruining the Proprietors of them, or from preventing the Husbandmen from getting their Plow-shares, Carts, or other Utensils, mended; or from destroying the Manufactury of Ship-Building, by depriving them of the Liberty of making Bolts, or Spikes, proper for carrying on that Work. And yet 'tis hoped it will more effectually prevent the Increase of Manufacturies in the Colonies, than the severest Clause could do, by preferring to them Employments of so much greater value.
 'Tis undoubtedly a great Detriment to the Trade of this Nation, to suffer Ships to sail from the Plantations to the Straits, &c. and return again, without being obliged first to come home, and to clear out from hence for the Plantations.
 For, notwithstanding the Laws against taking in any of the Manufactures or Merchandize of those Countries, Sailors and Super-Cargoes will break thro them; and when they receive Money, will invest part of it in some Commodity or other, to carry back with them; and they never want Opportunities of buying Italian Silks, French Silks, Stuffs and Druggets, Indian Silks and Callicoes, French, Dutch, and Hamburgh Linens: by which means the Money that should be brought to us, is laid out in foreign Countries.
 This irregular Navigation draws away more of our Sailors to settle in the Plantations, than any one Imployment that can be named. 
For abundance of West-Country Vessels that go to New-England to purchase Fish, make several Voyages without ever touching in Great Britain, it being entirely out of the way.
 This Practice calls over the Wife to visit the Husband at New-England; and when they are together, they soon become Inhabitants, and so we lose our People and Trade too.
 Therefore to regulate this Trade, and render it equally advantageous both to Great Britain and the Plantations, it is proposed that all Ships belonging to the Plantations, who take in a Loading of Fish or Lumber for the Straits, shall be obliged, before they return to the Plantations, to come to Great Britain, and bring the Produce of their Cargoes with them, and then clear out for the Plantations.
 This Method will put both our and their Navigation upon an equal and just Foundation; and must satisfy those Gentlemen who were uneasy to see so many of our Seamen carried away into the Service of the Colonies.
 I know it will be objected, that so many Ships being obliged to return to England from the Straits, many of them must come home empty, and consequently be a dead Loss to the Owners.
 But if this Regulation is made in our Navigation, those Ships that discharge in Portugal, Spain, &c. must come to Great Britain before they return to America; and may afford to take in a Loading at a smaller Freight than either the Dutch or Hamburghers can send their Ships thither, and return; and consequently will become the common Carriers for them both: for the Dutch Merchants, &c. study all frugal ways to render their Goods as cheap at Market as possible.
 The Navigation now carried on between the Plantations, Spain, Portugal, and the Straits, without coming for England, is for Fish, Timber, Boards, Pipe-Staves, and other Lumber; and because of the Quickness of the Voyage, great Quantities are sold in those Countries, for which large Sums are remitted, and laid out to purchase Manufactures in England. 
But very few Plantation Certificate-Goods are sold there, because bulky Commodities will not bear the Charges of importing into Great Britain, of passing Debentures, and Re-shipping, and Freight, to the Straits, which cannot be less than 5 or 6s. per Hundred; which is in a manner a Prohibition upon Sugar, Tobacco, Rice, and all other bulky Commodities, the one half of which would be a great Profit to the Merchant.
 Some Years since the Rice of Carolina was carried directly to Portugal, &c. and great Quantities were sold there; and so well approved, that it beat out the Rice of Verona and Egypt wherever it came; and large Remittances were made from thence to England for the Produce thereof.
 But as soon as this Liberty was restrain'd, our Markets to Portugal, &c. were lost, and the Planters fell under such Discouragements, that they have not proceeded with the same Vigour in raising Rice ever since; which is a very great Loss to the Manufacturers of this Kingdom: for all the Money which our Planters can raise, is sent here to buy them Clothing and Necessaries; so that England loses the selling of just so much in Manufactures and Merchandize as is abated in the Quantity of Rice that might be exported to Portugal, &c. For our People in the Colonies think it their happiness to be clothed with our Manufactures, and while there, to scrape up something to send home, that if possible they may return to Old England, their original Soil, and here, in Plenty and Ease, spend the Remains of Life.
 Suppose we now send to Spain, Portugal, &c. from all the Plantations, to the value of 100,000l. yearly in Fish, Lumber, &c. and this Money is remitted to England, and laid out in our Woollen and other Manufactures, it is all Profit to us; but if the Merchant be debar'd this short Navigation, and be obliged to land them in England, and reship them, we should not send one twentieth part to the Straits, &c. that we now do; which Loss would fall on the Manufactures, Product and Merchandize of England.
 If those who sit at the Helm would be pleased to consider what Productions of the Plantation will bear bringing home, and reshipping to Spain, &c. and what will not, they might, by their Prudence and Foresight, direct every Branch of the Plantation-Trade to be improved to a very great degree: And if Port-Mahon was made a free Port, bulky Commodities might be lodged there, when Markets did not answer, till there was a Demand for them, which would soon draw a considerable Trade thither; and would also be attended with so many Accommodations in favour of the Trade of Great Britain, that it deserves a proper time to explain, and set forth the Advantages thereof.
 Portugal, Spain, the Straits, and the Levant, consume a large part of the Commodities brought from America, and might be great Customers for the Products of the English Plantations, could they be carried directly to them upon an easy Freight; therefore all Goods that are not capable of Manufactury, and cannot bear the Charge of bringing home and reshipping, might go directly to the Straits: which would greatly inlarge the Sales of our Plantation-Commodities, and draw hither the Silver and Gold of the Indies, without digging for it.
 I have carried this Letter to a much greater length than I at first intended, tho I have only touched on several things as necessary Hints to lead to further Inquiries: I have also omitted some things in which there is room for further Information. What I have writ has been at spare Minutes in the Intervals of Business: But I hope to find leisure to enlarge on some Particulars I have now touch'd upon, and also to treat further upon some Points in Trade, and the natural Advantages belonging to Great Britain, that may be greatly improv'd for the Benefit of the Publick. 
 POSTSCRIPT. IT has been alledged our Iron is made with Copps-Wood, and we should not have Consumption enough for it, were it not for IronWorks. 
But I believe upon Enquiry, it will be found, that Copps-Wood is chiefly used in drawing CastIron into Bar, which bears but a small Proportion of the Consumption of Wood to that of melting down the Oar into Cast-Iron.
 But if the largest is used in Furnaces, it may certainly be used to more advantage in making Pig-Iron into Bar: and, as I have already observ'd, our Iron-Manufactury cannot be fully carried on, without about 20,000 Ton of foreign Iron added to what we make.
 It will be greatly the Interest of this Kingdom to promote the Importation of Cast or Pig-Iron from the Plantations, by taking off all Duties, and allowing a small Bounty to encourage the Beginning of such an Undertaking (without which it is to be feared little Progress will be made in it) in order to be wrought into BarIron here.
 For I am informed, the same Quantity of Wood that will make as much Sow-Iron as is sufficient for one Ton of Bar-Iron, will make near four times the quantity of Pig into Bar-Iron; and the number of Poor employ'd in forging Iron into Bar, will be abundantly more than can work at Furnaces.
 Supposing, for Argument, our Copps-Wood now makes 8000 Ton of Iron from the Oar into Cast-Iron, and from Cast into Bar, the same Quantity may make 30,000 Tun out of Pig into Bar-Iron; and if that Quantity is not enough for Home-Consumption, it may be enlarged to 40 or 50,000 Tun, without breaking in upon our Timber.
 For if we have Cast-Iron from the Plantations, any Part of the Kingdom, to which there is WaterCarriage, and Wood and Water convenient for erecting Forges, may have the same opportunity of making Pig into Bar-Iron, as those already erected. And there are very few Counties in the Kingdom but have the Conveniency of navigable Rivers or Water-Carriage to them, and may, if Gentlemen please, partake of the Advantages, as well as those Counties that have Iron-Oar and Furnaces among them.
 And as several Gentlemen are desirous to encourage the Importation of Pig-Iron, and not Bar, from our own Plantations, fearing it might interfere with the Bar-Iron made here; yet the BarManufactury may be carried on to the great Advantage of those Gentlemen of this Kingdom, who are willing to be concerned in Iron-Works in the Plantations, without any manner of Dependency on Great Britain for a Market.
 For if Bar-Iron was brought home from the Plantations, and lodged in the King's Ware-House, till sent to a foreign Market; or carry'd directly to Portugal, Spain, and the Straits, as we do Lumber, Fish, &c. we should find Markets enough for all that will be made, the Value of which would be sent us home in Gold or Silver.
 FINIS. 
