An Humble PROPOSAL FOR THE Increase of our Home TRADE, AND A Defence to GIBRALTAR:  BEING A better security for all our Shipping that Trades in the Straights, and entirely checks and restrains the growth of Highway-men, Foot-pads, House-breakers, Shop-lifters, Horse-stealers, Incendiaries and Others, that are guilty of enormous Crimes; rendering them useful, that in case of a War, it will be above a Hundred Thousand a Year in this Kingdoms way. ------ By JOSEPH DAVIES.s------  Picture of a ship ------ LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, 1731.
   
The PREFACE. Courteous READER, FOllowing the Custom of other Writers, I have made a small Porch to my humble Proposal, where I beg Leave to shelter myself from any impending Storms, as first from those Gentlemen who may contemn my honest Studies for a Publick Good, because it comes from a Person of so mean an Appearance, and not of some Rank or Distinction, whose very Name fix'd to it wou'd have given it Authority, and a general Acceptance. And to those who through Education, or Party Perswasion, or Interest, or other private Reasons, may be of a different Opinion, that this was not done to affront them, or to oppose their Humours; no, my chief Design is the Reasons offer'd for a National Service. And to those who I seem to level at, I next apply myself to.
 And these, through their misguided Wills, may draw down their heavy Displeasure upon me, which I dread more falling into their Hands, then I do Boras's Blasts, or Neptune's Salt Waves; tho' I am offering nothing but what may tend to the reforming of their Lives and Manners; and as the Physick may not be Toothsome, it may prove Good and Wholesome both to Soul and Body; and it has made my Heart Bleed to see and hear of so many Youths cut off before they come to their thinking Age, and Transportation is but a Bubble, and some of them knows the Secret; but sending them to Gibralter, being a middle Way, whereby Justice will be satisfied, the Offender punish'd, their old Hopes dissappointed of coming back at Pleasure, Mony saved, and honest People may Travel more safely, and abundance of Ships preserved, Trade better secured, the Nation become more formidable, and His Majesty's Reign made to shine greater then any of His Predecessors.
  An Humble PROPOSAL, &c. It is most humbly propos'd,
 THAT if his Majesty and the Nation will be pleas'd to allow of a few Gallies to be built at, or sent to Gibralter and Port-Mahone, to be man'd with Convicts, such as are cast for Transportation. The bare Apprehension of being made a Galley-Slave, will strike such a Terror into the Minds of those vile People; viz. Highwaymen, Foot-pads, Housebreakers, Shop-lifters, Pick-pockets, Horse-stealers, Incendiaries and others, that are guilty of enormous Crimes, who like Locusts swarm in our Roads and Streets, and infects all Places to such a degree, that honest People are not safe, either at Home or Abroad; but when these People shall know to their dread, that instead of Transportation, they shall be sent to row in Gallies, or other Labour, without any hopes of Freedom till their Sentence is expired, it will certainly put a stop to Thieving and Villany, for it will cause such a Terror upon their Minds, of the Rigour, that those Paterroons, or Officers of the Gallies, exercises over those unfortunate People, who for the Punishment of their Crimes are thus dealt with, and could not be restrained by any milder Methods. 
This with all humble Submission, seems a far better way then to take away the Lives of so many hale young Men, who perhaps never saw Twenty, and had been well educated, and of honest Parents, being cut of before they have liv'd out half their Days.
 That by this Proposal they may be saved, and brought to a sense of their past Follies, in following of an extravagant vicious course of Life. And may be the happy means to convince them and others of the real Advantages of an honest sober way of living, that they may become serviceable to their Country in their several Trades and Capacities. But as they have by their repeated Robberies, and other Villainies wrong'd the Nation in general, they may be made use of for a National Service, which in some measure may attone for the Mischiefs they have done, in the course of their past Lives.
 And I shall further offer, that by sending of these Convicts to our Plantations and Collonies, it is only a mock upon the Nation, for we find by woful Experience that it does not answer the good Purpose, for which the Transportation Law was enacted; for it does not lessen the Number of Thieves, or put a stop to exorbitant Tempers of these vile People; for the change of the Climate makes no Alterations either in their Manners or Morals, for wicked they was and so they continue. And learns, to be, by their being often transported, half Sailors, but compleat arch Rogues. Jamaica and other Parts of the West-India Islands by their wicked Behaviours, has enter'd into a Protest, to entirely refuse taking one of them.
 And no doubt but those Places where they are sent to now, will be forc'd to follow their Examples. And their Banishment which was designed as their Punishment, they make use of to repeat all their former Villainies, giving ill Examples to their Youths, persuading their Negroes to rob their Masters and run away with them, either aboard the Pyrates, or Spanish Guard de Coast, they being thoroughly qualified for any vile or base employ. And the poor Sufferers that have been sadly abus'd, and their Substances taken from them, by those Savages in the shapes of Men, have often reflected on those who gave them these Opportunities, that they did not hang them out of the way at first.
 These People making a Ridicule or Banter of Transportation, telling one another, that it is but a trip over the HerringPond, their Passage being paid, D--g their Pretious Bloods, if that Country shall hold them long; they being thoroughly acquainted with the way of it, which to all thinking honest People, is the highest Contempt of the Law, and encourages and buoys them up in their vile Practices.
 But how long these People shall serve, I will not offer to name, but leave that to the Wisdom and Prudence of the Law-makers, and their Judges to the nature of the Crimes they are convicted off.
 I beg leave, humbly, to offer briefly, some few of the repeated Services, that Gallies may be made use off.
 For as there is a strong Current, sets always through the Gut, if it proves Calm, which is frequent in those Parts: Ships that have been coming through, have drove past Gibralter, as high as Malaga, and others that have been coming down, have met with these Calms, and Ships of great Value, which tho' so near, could not fetch into the Bay, and so exposed to great Dangers, and some that have been taken by the Spaniards, who always kept lurking with their Gallies, on purpose for those Opportunities, that our Cruizers could not come to assist them; and in sight sometimes of Gibralter, which is the highest Provocation, and has been done to the unspeakable loss of Trade, the Ruin of abundance of Merchants and Sailors; but these Evils will be sufficiently made up and provided against, For we can with our Gallies in Conjunction with our Men of War, command all Ships passing, or re-passing in those Seas, rendering there Trade difficult to them, and of many Advantages to us of this Kingdom, that between the Ships we may save of our own, and what we may take of others, in case of a War it may be some hundred thousand Pounds a Year, For then not a Ship shall be suffered to pass, either coming in, or going out, but we may speak with them, Blow High, Blow Low.
 I humbly appeal, to the Right Honourable the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and Captains of Men of War, and others, how serviceable Gallies have been made use of in an Engagement, to tow out of the Line all disabled Ships, and to bring others in their Stations.
 And Gallies will entirely prevent any Trade by Sea to old Gibralter, and there other Harbours, with there small Vessels, that went along Shore in the last Rupture, and brought 'em fresh Supplies and Stores, that our Men of War could not prevent, it being not safe to venture so close to the Land, and our Long-Boats was not a Match for them, and it will certainly awe the Algereens, and Sally-Rovers, who so oft in my Memory, have play'd the Rogue with us, in making War and Peace at their Pleasure, and our Rich Presents. 
And as this is offer'd with an honest Intention for a Publick good, to prevent these Evils for the Time to come; yet as there may arise several Objections, I shall briefly Answer, to some of the greatest that may be brought against this Proposal.
 Objection. It may be a great Expence to the Nation in building of Gallies.
 I Answer that, by what it has cost the Government between the Rewards of those that have been capitally convicted, as for some 300l. for others 50l. 40l. and the four Pounds four Shillings, that the Government pays for the Passage of every one that has been Transported, but since this King has come to the Crown, it may be made appear, that it will far out ballance the Charge of building a sufficient number of Gallies; and if I might offer further without disobliging, that the Charge of one Third Rate, in building and fitting her out for the Sea for six Months, by a modest Computation, will far out ballance the Cost of these Gallies. 
But I humbly beg, that I may be understood, that by this Proposal, I am not for lessening any one Ship in his Majesty's Royal Navy, which is so much the Glory and Defence of these Kingdoms, and the Terror of the whole World, but that Gallies may be added as Tenders, or as shall be thought most for Service to them.
 Obj. How many Gallies may be sufficient, to employ such Numbers that are sent away from Time to Time.
 Answer, Eight may be enough, four or six at Gibralter, the other at Port-Mahone, as shall be thought most for Service, every Galley to employ 312 Men, so that by what shocking Terrors it may cause on the one Hand, and the surely securing them on the other, putting it out of the Powers of these People to return back, till the time of their Sentence is expired, as hundreds has done from the Places where they have been transported too: And I have been fully informed, that there is no Law to dispose of them as Servants, but only to put them ashore to run wild there, and not to return back, it being Death without benefit of Clergy; this puts them to rob and plunder the Country, till they can find an Opportunity of meeting a Master of a Ship, either at New England, or some other Place, who is as willing to employ them as they, for a Passage back, and perhaps some gets 10l. for there run Home, giving themselves other Names, but some has been so fool-hardy, in open defiance to the Law and Justice, to come to the Place that they was transported from, and have been took and Executed for it; so that by this Proposal, they will be reduced to such small Numbers, more than ever yet could be done by Deaths or Banishment.
 And it is plain, that we have had more robbing in England in one Month, then has been committed in Italy, Spain, or Portugal in twelve Months, and it's thought it is owing to those Countries having Gallies, putting it out of the Power of those People to play at Fast and Loose.
 Obj. That it is offer'd against a Free People.
 Answer, I own it is the Happiness of the People of England, that we are a free People, that our Laws are made by joint Consent of King and Parliament, that we have many Privileges above other Nations; and that we are not extorted to any Confession, either by wracking on the Wheel, or other inhuman Inventions which is shocking. But I humbly conceive that when a Person is convicted by Evidence of breaking the King's Laws, they have lost all pleadings of their Freedoms, but is entirely at the Laws and King's disposal, whether for Life, Death, Banishment, or long Imprisonment, or Liberty. And Transportation was first thought to be, as great a breaking into the Rights and Freedom of these People, as now Gallies is offer'd; and Transportation was well designed, tho' of late Years it has proved the reverse.
 Obj. That some would rather chuse Death then suffer themselves to be thus confin'd.
 Answer, It is the unhappy Temper of some Men, they never was, or desired to be made usefully Good, or morally Honest, for their exorbitant Humours, which admits of no Bounds when that comes to have a restraint put upon it, by the just Methods of the Law, it either flings them into those vile wild desperate Resolutions, that had always been their directors to chuse Death, rather than to undergo these gentle Severities; or else it so dispirits them, by a sullen change of their Minds, that they had rather chuse Death in all its hideous forms, then to be brought under any Subjection; like some Creatures that I have seen in Virginia, when first caught wrangles with their Bridles and Masters, and endeavours to be their own Executioners, but by Degrees are brought to Use and Labour, and so they may be made serviceable to God and their Country, and run wild no longer.
 Obj. As it is Peace, we have no Occasion for Gallies, and so we don't know how to employ these Convicts.
 Answer, All wise Parents provides the Rod, and has it ready to make Use of, when Necessity requires it; and as his Majesty, Lords and Commons, are the Nations Parents, they are not to depend upon being always in Peace with France and Spain, and some others that are our Rivals in many Branches of Trade in the Mediterranean; and we see with what Resolution and Industry the Spaniards are at this Time, in building Forts at Gibralter Bay, and Cabrita Point, against the first Rupture, tho' they may gloss it over by many false Pretences, it is plain as the Sun at Noon-Day, by their bringing to them so many heavy Cannon, it is to be in readiness against -- and so to make the Bay of little use to us, for where our Ships rides it will be under the Command of their Forts; so that I shall leave that to all wise thinking Men, if that be Wisdom in us of this Nation to suffer it, whilst it's in our Power do some things that may disappoint all their cunning designs and mischievous views; and what I would humbly offer, that our Government would be as thoughtful and industrious to promote things for a Publick Good, as Spain is, and there is an absolute necessity for the building a Mole Pier, or Harbour, as laid down by that little prickt Line in the New Mole, which will be several Years in building, at a vast Expence to the Nation, if you hire Workmen out of England; but the Method I propose of sending Convicts, it will save the Nation a Million of Money, but when finish'd, will put such a baulk on the Spanish Policy, and likewise be a place of safety for all our Ships in hard Gales of Wind, and thus they may be employ'd tho' in times of Peace, in building some necessary Fortifications both there and at Port-Mahone, as may render those Places impregnable.
 And shewing this to some Ingenious Gentlemen, that were truly satisfied with the usefulness, and repeated Services that Gallies would be off; but their main Objection was, that Gallies would not be comply'd with for fear of disobliging the Spaniards.
 Ans. For the same Reason it is thought that some is for giving them Gibralter, but it will be an unwise Action, if they do, and the fatal Consequences that will soon follow, will but too plainly show it, and the Spaniards are not endued with the same good Nature, or Care to disoblige us, when they built that Fort at the head of the Bay to annoy our Shipping, and to hang a Master of a Ship in sight of us, for bringing the Garrison some small Necessaries, and to continue their Guarda Costa, to Kill, Plunder and take our Shipping in the West-Indies, and one, or two up the Straits, and to make Prizes of them; and now by a strict Order forbid upon Pain of Death, all Communication with us at Gibralter, both by Sea and Land, though we have been at an immense Charge with our Fleets to serve them: But I shall say no more to this Objection, but leave it to the Thoughts of all honest Englishmen who are not corrupted, or in a Lethargy; only this that Gallies in conjunction with our Men of War, will be as great a Thorn in their Sides, as any one thing we can do to them.
 I would beg leave to give some few short hints why we should not part with Gibralter.
 For by keeping of it, as I have propos'd, by Gallies assisting our Men of War, all Nations will have such a share of Trade as we are pleas'd to allow them; for Gibralter may justly be call'd the Key of the Straits, and if ever we part with it, we lock the Door against ourselves; and we shall vastly suffer in those two most profitable Branches of Trade, as first our Turkey Trade, that takes off such quantities of Cloth, as Scarlets, Purples and Bays, and employs so many Thousands of Families. And our Newfoundland Trade, that brings into this Kingdom some hundred thousand Pounds a Year of ready-money got out of the Sea; besides a Nursery for Sailors: Tho' it may be objected that our Fleets can command Entrance at any time in the Straits.
 Answer, That Trade that must be carry'd on with so high a Hand, will suffer and lesson, for the following Reasons, as first the Turkey Trade, for the French who are a cunning subtle People, have learnt to make to a great Perfection the same sort of Goods; and will take the Advantage whilst we are forming Fleets, to supply them from Marseilles, which lies near at Hand. And next our Newfoundland Ships, which are neither Ships of Force or Runners, these will be also badly off, for as Fish is a perishing Commodity, whilst they are getting ready to join their Convoy, from their several Harbours, there Fish may be spoil'd, instead of enriching ourselves by Trade, it may prove to the utter Ruin of abundance of honest industrious Families, and vastly lesson his Majesties Revenues, and flat and dull the Spirit of Trade; for it was always the Strife and Ambition of those Persons, that traded that way, to be their only Care, to be first at Market because of a Price.
 And in keeping of Gibralter and Port-Mahone, we have Harbours and Store-houses of our own, at that distance, where we can shelter, clean and refit our Ships without being beholden to any other Nation, and if any others should become Masters of that Place, but God forbid they ever should, they would make us pay for going thro' the Straits Mouth, all one as we do at our Tole-Gates, which will not agree with the Honour of our English Nation; as being always stiled Masters of the Seas, and so bring a Yoke upon us, that we nor our Children are able to bear, and our Fathers would have made them to tremble to have mentioned it to them.
 The common and most frequent Objection that is made use of, is, How did we do before we had Gibralter? 
Ans. Such Persons that States this Question may well be suspected, that they have some private Advantages of their own, or other sinister Ends; so that they are Deaf to all other Reasoning then a tame surrender of the Place.
 And as to those that have not given themselves fairly to think and weigh the Matter in the Ballance of the Sanctuary, I would ask, Have they consider'd the World grows more Numerous and Politick? And are they acquainted with the Situation of the Place, and how that the Spaniards have Ceuta, which lies opposite to Gibralter, and that by keeping of Ships and Gallies in both those Bays, that both Shores will become alike hazerdous for Ships that passes that way.
 And these Gentlemen might as well Argue, How did we do before we had such Numbers of brave Ships of Force and Beauty in His Majesty's Royal Navy, or such fine commodious Docks and Yards to build and refit in, and the use of Guns and Powder, or the Art of Printing; and may other very useful Arts and Sciences brought to wonderful Perfection, both for Profit and Pleasure, that now we cannot be without? and with due Submission, it may be said, To what Purpose is it to enlarge the King's Dominions in the West-Indies, or elsewhere, or to neglect all due Care to preserve our trading Ships; but it is to be wish'd and hop'd Gibralter will, notwithstanding the thick Mist that are before some Peoples Eyes, remain in the Possession of the Kings of Great Britain, 'till Time shall be no more?
 Those Places being gain'd at the Expence of so much Blood and Treasure.
 Some may object that I am a hindrance to Trade, because I argue against sending of Felons to our Plantations; because it is those Countries, that takes of such large quantities of our Home Goods. 
Answer, I own it is, but as to those Felons, as I have made it appear, there is not one in forty stays there, but I would humbly offer for the good of Trade, to prevent the rotten from going, and that will preserve the sound, and we having many Millions of Acres of good Land unimprov'd for want of People; and those Countries producing many beneficial Commodities, that we of this Nation wants, which will employ many Thousands of Families. That all Trades will be the better for it, but especially the Woollen Manufactories, Hatters and Smith's-work in all its Branches; which employs whole Towns in England at those Trades; and may be the happy means to prevent such Numbers, who through decay of Trade are become poor, and thrown to lie rotting in Goals, so shocking to Human Nature: And it might prevent others who are forc'd through the difficulties they meet with, to get a living for the common Necessaries of Life, turn Thieves, Whores, Night-walkers, Forgers, Sharpers, Smugglers, Receivers, Procurers, Bawds, Gipsies, Fortune-tellers, Insolvent Debtors, Parish Poor and common Beggars, and others, that goes round the Countries, imposing on those well inclin'd charitable People by false Passes, as Pretenders by loss of Fire, Shipwreck, hard Rents, loss of Cattle, Suretyship, decay of Trade, and the like; if these were to go to our new Settlements, as there is proper Encouragements by Merchants, and other Gentlemen, for going there, it would be their truest Interest to go, that they may not be a Neusence to the Places they inhabit, or burthensome to the Parishes where they belong to, for they will be put upon a Footing to do good for themselves, get Estates for their Families, they becoming Customers to us, and we to them for their Produce; so that the mutual Trade will tend very much to the Benefit of both, and to the Increase of His Majesty's Revenues.
  POSTSCRIPT. Courteous READER,
 AFTER several Years Observation of the Situation and Strength of Gibralter, and the Benefit of so good a Harbour as Port Mahon, and the Honour and Happiness that we of this Nation have in being Masters of such important Fortresses, which I have laid down in the shortest Method I could, having more Reasons to offer, that will protect all Persons at Home, of what Rank or degree soever, from the Insults of Thieves and Enemies, and be the happy Means of saving a many Lives and Ships. 
And I do assure you, it was not out of Ambition to be thought an Author, or to have my Name in Print, I had no such Views, for I was a Midshipman on Board the Oxford Man of War when I wrote these, under the Command of the Right Honourable the Lord Vere Beauclerk; and talking of these Things to several Officers of Men of War and Commanders of Merchant Ships, they importuned me to give them a Copy of what I had wrote, I comply'd with their Request, never designing to proceed any farther.
 But coming for England, and talking about the present Affairs, I show'd some Gentlemen what I had wrote, they never ceasing asking me for a Copy of it; but finding I was engaging myself to write more than my Inclinations or Time would allow, I offer'd to get some few printed.
 These Gentlemen still prompting me to go on, and by their repeated Perswasions that Things of this Nature which is offer'd for so publick a Good, could not fail of meeting with a generous and national Encouragement; and I hope that private Gentlemen, Shopkeepers, Tradesmen and others that lives remote from the Sea, and may have no Dealing that way, cannot plead Ignorance and say they do not understand it, but must own that this Proposal is well designed, and if comply'd with by our Legislatures, it will be for the good of every Body.
 And I being a Stranger to any great Men, is the only Reason why I take this laborious Method of tiring my self, in hopes I may meet with some true Patriot of their Country, whose Power and Authority may be the Means of getting these my humble Proposals preferr'd to the Consideration of his MAJESTY and both Houses of Parliament. 
But as I have not wherewith to support the Charge of getting six or seven hundred printed on a fine Paper to give to every Member one, as they go into the House, with other unavoidable Expences, whilst I give my Attendance to get those Things preferr'd at the next Sessions of Parliament.
 And I do assure you, whatever you in your Goodness and Wisdom shall contribute towards the said Cost, if it be ever so small, it shall be carefully and frugally laid out for those good Ends and Purposes, as proposed; and I humbly beg Leave to say, that I am a Contributor, tho' I have taken the labouring Ore.
 There may arise one Objection more, that is, If the Men are taken care of, What must be done with the Women?
 Answer, It was the Men that was their Cover, and in view of their Protections, that they were guilty of so many vile Actions; and, according to the Proverb, if there was no Whores, there would be no Rogues; and if there was no Rogues, there would be no Whores; so that it is like the Plague, they Infect one another; but, sending the Men to Gibraltar, will be an entire Seperation from their old Companions, and lessen the Numbers of these Women Thieves.
 And as to Transporting the Women, it may be serviceable to the Country where they are sent to, and may easily be kept in such Restrictions, that they may be render'd very useful; for if they should attempt to run through the Woods two or three hundred Miles, what would they be the nearer, for no Master of a Ship will entertain them; so that there is an impossibility of their coming back, which will oblige them to be good Servants, and may for the remaining part of their Lives, become honest Women.
 THE EXPLANATION OF THE MAPP. A. THE Ships going in the Straits Mouth, B. is the Bay of Gibraltar, C. is a Galley towing in of as Ship clear out of Gun-shot, from any of the Spanish Forts, D. is the Figures that shows where and how many Fathoms of Water you have in the Bay, E. is Cabrita Point, where the Spaniards are building a Fort with a mischeivous Design, that our Ships will be forc'd to keep at a further Distance, more in the Current of the Gut, that if they have not a fair Wind to run in, the Current will hurry them past the Bay, F. is old Gibraltar, where the Spaniards have a large Town, G. is a small Island, where the Spaniards have built a strong Fort of 12 heavy Cannon that commands that Side of the Bay. H.</LABEL> is the Highland that goes into the Country of Spain. I. is the Spaniards New Fort, that gives us so much uneasiness, and well it may, for it commands that part of the Bay as laid down in the Mapp, where the two Ships Rides, and so they will render the Bay of little Use to us, K. is the Circumvention Wall that goes a cross the Low-land, to cut of all Communication from Gibraltar, L. is the Prince and Princes Batteries and Willis's Battery, that stood all the Spaniards firing, and now is so well fortified that our Men can stand to their Guns under cover Boom proof, M. is the TownChurch and Hospital, N. is the old Mole where small Vessels Rides, O. is the new Citidel, P.P.P. is the Bastons and Forts all along to Europa Point, Q. is the new Mole, R. is the prick'd Line the designed Work, that I above every thing else strives to promote, and that we cannot be without, and when finish'd, will be clear out of Gun shot from the Spanish Forts, and be as safe Harbour for all our Ships that puts into the Bay, S. is the Signal House, where there is a look-out kept that gives notice to the Town, by hanging out upon a Pole as many large Balls as they see Ships a coming, either from the Eastward or the Westward, T. is Europa Point, the Southermost Land of all Europee, V. is the Barbary Shore, W. is Cauta Bay, and a large City inhabited by the Spaniards, and is a strong Garrison where the King of Spain sends all his State Prisoners, and about 3 Miles to the Westward is the Moors Camp where they Trade all Day and Fight all Night, X. is Tangier Bay, where is a large City inhabited by the Moors call'd the Royal City of Tangier, and a little to the Westward stood old Tangier, formerly in Possession of the English, but now Demollish'd, Y.Y.Y. is the Ships going up the Mediterranian, the Cross shows the Points of the Compass.
 This Mapp being an exact Description of the Bay and Forts of Gibraltar, but the Barbary Shore is not Drawn to the true Distance by the Scale of Miles, by Reason of the Plate, but is done to give the Reader, who is not acquainted with the Place, the satisfaction of knowing what is meant by the Streights Mouth.
 * The Star is to shew how our English Gallies may Take, Sink, or Burn the Spanish small Vessels that go close to the Shore. The Moorings, is where the Men of War thet are Station'd Rides.
 And the Reason why I fixt the Map to this Proposal, is to give the clearest Apprehension of the Policy of Spain in building their Forts, and by the Methods laid down to shew how we may render their cunning Devices and wicked Attempts vain, and by the Blessing of God blast all their Projects, as we did their so fam'd invincible Armado in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, tho' laid as deep as the contrivance of Enemies or wicked Men can invent.
 FINIS. 
