A True and Exact ACCOUNT OF MANY Great Abuses Committed in the VICTUALLING Her Majesties Navy, From February 3, 1702/3. to July 1703. As appears by the Informations and Depositions of several Witnesses, with the Proceedings thereupon, both at the Admiralty Office, Hicks's-Hall, and Elsewhere. ------ For the Information of the Parliament and Publick. ------ LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCCIII. 
------ ------ The INTRODUCTION. CHarles Hore, the Complainer in the following Case, did in the Year 1701 make Complaint to the House of Commons, of a great Abuse Committed in Her Majesty's Brew-house at St. Katharines; which Complaint was Referr'd to the Consideration of a Committee, who consider'd the matter of Fact, and Reported in special to the House, as follows;
Mercurij 18. Die Martij, 1701.
 Mr. Edward Harley, according to Order, Reported, from the Committee appointed to Examine into the Matter of the Complaint of a great Abuse Committed in Her Majesty's Brew-house at St. Katharines, the matter of Fact as it appeared to them; which they had directed him to Report to the House, which he Read in his place, and afterwards Delivered it in at the Table, where the same was Read. 
Resolved,
 That it appears to this House, That there hath been a great Abuse Committed in Her Majesty's Brew-house at St. Katharines, by Drawing off the first Worts, to the Defrauding of Her Majesty, and Prejudice of the Seamen.
 Resolved,
 That the pretence of taking Perquisites in Her Majesty's Office of Victualling, tends much to the Prejudice of Her Majesty's Service.
 Ordered,
 That the said Resolution be laid before Her Majesty (by way of Address) by such Members of this House, as are of Her Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council.
 The Nature of this Complaint was, That the Officers and others belonging to the Brew-house, did take from the several Guiles of Sea Beer, Brewed for the Service of the Navy, large Quantities of the strongest and best Worts, for their own Use, and by the Addition of Water, made up the number of Barrels in each Guile; so that the Sailors had their full proportion of Drink, but the Strength and Heart of the Beer was left behind in the Officers Cellars.
 Hore made this Complaint in the first place to the Commissioners of Excise, who laid the same before the Commissioners of Victualling, as also sent their Officers to Enquire into the Fraud, who found it matter of Fact: And Mr. Denniston, a General Surveyor of the Excise, and several of his Officers, plainly proved the Fraud before the Committee of Parliament from their own Books; and gave the Committee a particular Account of the Strong Beer thus Embezell'd from the Sailors; which they found Conceal'd in the Officers Cellars, and in private Ware-Houses, in the BrewHouse.
 Note, That notwithstanding this Complaint was laid before the Commissioners of Excise and Victualling, as also before the Admiralty, no Justice was done the Nation in this particular, till such time as the Complaint had pass'd the Examination of Parliament; but on the Contrary, the Persons Complained against, were continued in their several Employments in the Brew-House.
 Note also, That by this Complaint, Hore saved the Nation at least Ten Thousand Pounds per Ann. by the Redress of the Complaint in the BrewHouse, and by taking away the illegal Perquisites of the Officers by Vote of Parliament; for which Service he had only the Sum of One Hundred Pounds given him by the Lord High Treasurer; which Sum he had Expended in the Prosecution of the Complaint in the several Offices, and at Parliament, besides his Loss of Time; all which did not Discourage him from making the following Complaint for the good of his Country.
 ------ ------ To His ROYAL HIGHNESS, &c.  The Humble Petition of Charles Hore. Sheweth,
 THAT there coming to Your Petitioners Knowledge, considerable Frauds, and Mismanagements in the Victualling of Her Majesty's Navy, by which the Health and Lives of the Seamen are in Danger, and any Expedition of the greatest Consequence, may thereby miscarry. 
That without a speedy and direct Inspection into the Matter of Fact it will be impossible to detect all the Abuses complain'd of; Or prevent the dangerous Effects of passing over a Matter of this Importance to Her Majesty's Service; Your Petitioner being ready and able by sufficient Evidence to prove his Charge.
 Therefore most humbly Prays, Your Royal Highness, will please to order than an immediate Survey of the Provisions for the Fleet be made by proper and fitting Persons, who have no Dependence on the Navy or Victualling Office, and make Report to Your Royal Highness of the State of the Victualling: And that Your Petitioner may have Your Royal Highness's Protection for his Witnesses, till heard; a List of whose Names he is ready to deliver, they being daily threatned to be Prest into the Service, in order to stifle this Complaint. 
Febr. 3. 1702/3.And Your Petitioner shall, &c. After the Delivery of the above Petition, the following Letter was sent to Hore.
 Admiralty Office, Feb. 8. 1702/3. Mr. Hore, YOU will herewith receive the Prince his Directions for the several Persons to attend his Councel on Wednesday Morning next, who you intend to make use of, to Prove what you have Alledged, relating to the Naval Provisions. I am
Your humble Servant, J. Burchet. Admiralty Office, the 11th of Feb. 1702/3. Sir, SIR Cloudesly Shovel, and Sir Richard Haddock, having appointed to Morrow Morning to begin to Survey the Sea-Provisions and the Victualling Office; and desiring therefore that you may attend them with such Persons as you shall judge most proper, in regard there is a Necessity to send the Provisions down to the Fleet with all the Dispatch that may be, I give you this Notice thereof, that you may order Matters so as to be able to attend those Gentlemen to morrow morning accordingly. I am
 Your humble Servant, J. Burchet.Mr. Hore received this at 6 at Night.
 The following Letter was sent in Answer to the former.
Right Honourable, I have spoken to Mr. Cock, Mr. Gibson, and Mr. Tutchin, in Relation to the Survey of Her Majesty's Provisions, appointed by Order of His Royal Highness; and I find them all unwilling to go in that Service, unless they know their Business, and are impower'd by His Royal Highness to act in that Affair; an immediate Survey being necessary in this Affair, I beg Your Honours speedy Resolution, and Answer herein, who am, 
 Right Honourable, Your most Humble Servant, Charles Hore.Feb. 15 1702/3.To this Letter Hore received the following Answer.
 Admiralty Office, the 15th of Feb. 1702/3. Mr. Hore, YOUR Letter was this Morning read to the Councel to His Royal Highness, by whose Directions I am to acquaint you, that Sir Cloudesly Shovel, and the rest of the Gentlemen, who are appointed to Survey the Naval-Provisions, upon the Complaint you lately made, are particularly directed to admit not only your self to the said Survey, but all such Persons as you shall judge necessary in Order to the making out your Charge. And therefore if Mr. Tutchin, Mr. Gibson, and any other will voluntarily accompany you on this Service, they will certainly meet with Assistance and Countenance: But the Councel do not think themselves impowered to oblige them to do it. I am 
 Sir,Your Humble Servant, J. Burchet. Right Honourable, I Received a Letter just now from Mr. Burchett, wherein he says your Honours are not Impowered to Oblige my Friends to go on the Survey; which I knew before; but my Friends are willing to go, and only want his Royal Highnesses Commission, which I leave to your Honours Consideration. I am, 
 Right Honourable, Your humble Servant, Charles Hore. February 15. 1703. Admiralty Office, the 17th of Feb. 1702/3. Mr. Hore, HIS Royal Highness having appointed some particular Business on Wednesday Morning next, I send you this Notice thereof, and am to desire that your self, and Witnesses, will attend the Prince's Council this Afternoon, about Five a Clock.
I am Your humble Servant, J. Burchet. The 18th of February, the said Hore attended his Royal Highnesses Council, with his Witnesses, and as many of them as their Honours thought necessary, were Examin'd, but they not being Examin'd upon Oath, the said Hore desir'd that Affidavits might be taken of their several Depositions, which was Granted by the Council, and are as followeth.
 Middlesex and Westminster. 
The Information of Richard Parrot, of Swedeland Court, upon Tower-Hill, near the Victualling Office, Butcher, taken upon Oath before me, one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County and Liberty. 
Sweareth,
 THAT from Bartholemew Tide 1701. to January following, this Informant was Imployed by the Purveyors, Mr. Wright of Mile-End, and Mr. Nunnery, to Kill Oxen and Hogs in Her Majesty's Victualling Office upon Tower-hill, in which said time this Informant Kill'd a very great number of Measled Hogs, which he carried to the Cutting House, where he saw them Weighed for the Sea Service; and as he verily Believes, were Cut, Salted, and Pack'd up for the same Service; and this Informant Deposeth, that in the same time there were several Dead Hogs brought into the aforesaid Office, which this Informant helped to Dress, and particularly one Night this Informant helped to Dress Seventeen, most part of which said Hogs Stunk so much, that this Informant was scarce able to Dress them, which he helped to carry to the Cutting House, where he saw them Weighed for the Sea-Service; and as this Informant verily believes, were cut, salted, and pack'd for the same Service; And this Informant further deposeth, that he was imployed as a Cutter from the said Month of Jan. 1701. till the middle of Novemb. last, in which said time this Informant did cut a great Number of measled Hogs, and Hogs that were brought in dead that stunk, which he saw salted and pack'd up for the Sea-Service. And this Informant further deposeth, that within the last mention'd Jan. 1701. to the middle of Novemb. following, Paul Dewy, Randal Rench, Thomas Winfield, John Misson, and William Ravenscroft, Master Butchers, came in the Name of Mr. Crawley Head Clark of the Cutting-House, very frequently for the best part of the Hogs and Oxen, which they themselves cut off, and carry'd away, and at divers other times commanded this Informant and other Cutters to cut off for them, which they carry'd away; some parts whereof were put in their Aprons, and other parts in their Breeches. And this Informant further deposeth, that it was the constant Custom of most of the Butchers and Salters that were imploy'd in the aforesaid Offices, during the time this Informant was there, to cut several pieces of Beef and Pork, which they carry'd away, and as he verily believes for their own use. And this Informant further deposeth, That he hath seen William Lawes, belonging to the Pickle-Yard in the aforesaid Office, several times to take and carry away several Mess-pieces of Pork, when they were packing of them up, and hath afterwards seen such like pieces Roasting in the aforesaid Lawes Kitchen, which he believes to be the same that he saw him take and carry away. And this Informant hath seen Mr. Tompian, who sells Brandy near the said Office, several times come to the said Cutting-House, and take and carry away with him several Mess-pieces of Pork. And this Deponant further deposeth, That one Thomas Lamb, Servant to William Wright Esq.; one of the present Commissioners for Victualling Her Majesty's Navy, came in his Masters Name, to the CuttingHouse for a Mess-piece of a Rump of Beef; which he had, and carry'd away. And this Informant further deposeth, That the aforesaid Paul Dewy, for encouraging this Informant to cut measled and stinking Hogs, that they might not be discovered, hath very often had given him (by the said Paul Dewy) Hog's-heads, Herslets and Tayls. And this Informant further saith not.
Subscribed Richard Parrot. Jurat. 11. die Febr. 1702. Coram me Rich. Rider. Vera Copia. Middlesex and Westminster. 
The Information of Thomas Mattocks at the White Lyon on Little Tower-Hill, in the Parish of Aldgate, London, taken upon Oath before me Richard Rider one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County and Liberty. 
Sweareth,
 THAT from about the beginning of October last, till the seventeenth Day of December following, this Informant was employ'd as a Salter in the Cutting-House, in the Victualling Office upon Tower-Hill. In which time this Informant deposeth there were several measled Hogs, and stinking Hogs, cut, salted, and packt up for Her Majesty's Service at Sea; which said Hogs were cut up by Thomas Dadly, and John Footing: Salted and packt up by several others. And that the best parts of several wholesome Hogs, and Oxen were taken away, and the Remaining part was cut and packt up for the Sea-Service, which said best parts at several times were carry'd away by John Bull, and John Hoskins, Salters, and George Price an Helper to the said Salters, Thomas Winfield, William Ravenscroft, and Paul Dewy, Butchers, and Randal Rench another Salter. 
And this Informant further deposeth, That betwixt the Sixteenth of July last, and the beginning of October following, one Jeremiah Eaton came in the Name of William Wright, Esq; one of the present Commissioners for Victualling Her Majesty's Navy, for four Mess-pieces of Beef, and four Mess-pieces of Pork, which were delivered to him, and he carry'd them away; all which Pieces aforesaid, were taken away after they were weighed to the Queen.
 Subscribed, Tho. Mattocks. Jurat. 10. die Febr. 1702. Coram me Rich. Rider. Vera Copia Middlesex and Westminster. 
The Information of John Weaver of St. Johns-street, in the Parish of St. Sepulchers in the said County, Butcher. Taken upon Oath before me one of Her Majesty's Justices for the said County and Liberty. 
Sweareth,
 THAT from Aug. 1701, to about Easter following, this Informant was imploy'd as a Butcher, both in the Slaughter-House and in the Scalding-House, in Her Majesty's Victualling Office upon Tower-Hill, between which said times, there were a considerable Number of measled Hogs kill'd, and as he verily believes were cut, salted, and pack'd up for Her Majesty's Service at Sea, because he saw them weighed to the King. And this Informant further deposeth that during the said time, several Hogs were brought in Dead, and several others alive, and died there, which were drest by this Informant, by Order, they not being sweet. And further deposeth, That he hath seen several Hams of Pork cut out and carry'd away: But by whose Order this Informant knows not. And that from the latter end of August last past, to the latter end of October following, This Informant was imploy'd as aforesaid, in which time there were a considerable Number of Hogs kill'd that were measled, which said Hogs were weighed to the Queen; and as this Informant verily believes, were cut, salted, and pak'd up for Her Majesty's Service at Sea. 
And this Informant further deposeth, That Paul Dewy, one of the Master Butchers under the Purveyor, gave this Informant Directions, that when he carry'd a Measled Hog to be weighed at the Cutting-House, he should not carry it to the Lower Cutting-House, but to the Upper, because as this Informant verily believes, if it had been carry'd to the Lower Cutting-House, it had been returned.
 Subscribed, John Weaver. Jurat. 10. die Febr. 1702. Coram me Rich. Rider. Vera Copia. Middlesex and Westminster. 
The Information of John Baldwin, of Spittle-Fields, in the Parish of Stepny, Labourer, taken upon Oath before me, one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the said County and Liberty. 
Sweareth,
 THAT the Months of October, and November, last past, this Informant was imployed as a Servant to several of the Salters, in Her Majesty's Victualling Office on Tower-Hill; in which said time, this Informant helped to Salt and Pack up several Meazled Hogs, and one very Stinking Hog, which did Stink to that Degree, that this Informant was not able to hold his Head over it, while he was Salting and Packing it up: And further Deposeth, that in October aforesaid, one Jeremiah Eaton, came to the Cutting House, and ordered Richard Cook, to Cut a Surloyn of Beef out of a Quarter which he himself Pitched upon, and it was accordingly Cut, and Carried away by the said Eaton, as this Informant verily believes.
Subscrib'd, John Baldwin. Jurat 10. die Feb. 1702. Coram me Richard Rider. Vera Copia. Middlesex and Westminster. 
The Information of  Mary Merryman, Wife of  Henry Merryman of St. Katharines-street, in the Parish of St. Katharine's Shoemaker. Taken upon Oath before me, one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County and Liberty. 
Sweareth,
 THAT about Christmas last past this Informant was told by one Ann Wakefield, a Servant to Mr. Randoff, belonging to the Queen's Victualling Office, that her Master had an Hogshead of Pork brought home by two Labourers to his House, between twelve and one a Clock in the Day time, from the Yard to which her said Master belonged, and after they had boyl'd two or three pieces of the Pork, found it not good, therefore her said Master ordered it back again to the said Yard.
Subscribed Mary Merryman. Jurat 10. die Feb. 1702. Coram me Rich. Rider Vera Copia. Middlesex and Westminster. 
The Information of  Thomas Pinfold, of  Grayhound-Court in the Precincts of St. Katharines near the  Tower, Labourer. Taken upon Oath before me, one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County and Liberty. 
Sweareth,
 THAT in the Month of Octob. last past, this Informant was standing by the Block in the Upper Cutting-House in Her Majesty's Victualling Office upon Tower-hill, one Henry Lowe desired this Informant to hold an Hog whilst he cut him up; And when the said Hog was cutting, this Informant told the said Lowe, that the said Hog was measled, whereat he shaked his Head; but yet cut it up. And the said Hog was cut into Messpieces, salted and pack'd in the Presence of this Informer. And this Informer further deposeth, that he saw several Mess-pieces of Pork drawn out of the Brine, which stunk and were pack'd up in the Cask. And this Informant further deposeth, That he hath several times seen Thomas Winfield a Master Butcher, cut several of the best pieces of Pork, and carry'd them away with him. And this Informant further deposeth, That about the Month of May or June last Ann, Wakefield, Servant to Mr. Randoff, belonging to the Queen's Victualling Office, came into the Coopers Yard in the said Office, to this Informant and his Brother, and desired them in her Master's Name to come to her said Master's House, and help carry down two Cask of Beer into his Cellar, which having done, Mr. Randoffs Sister and his said Servant desired them to help down with a Hogshead of Pork, which then lay in Mr. Randoffs-Yard, which they accordingly did; which at first they refus'd to do, thinking the same too heavy for them; whereupon Mrs. Randoff and the said Servant told this Informant and his Brother, they might well do it, for two Men brought it from the Office. And this Informant adds, that after they had got it into the Cellar, Mrs. Randoff desired to open the Head of the said Hogshead to see if the Pickle was not run out of it, which when open'd, they found the same to be full of Mess-pieces of Pork, and further saith not.
Sic Subscribed Thomas Pinfold. Jurat 11. die Feb. 1702. Coram me Rich. Rider Vera Copia. Middlesex and Westminster. 
The Information of  John Watts of  Long-lane in the Parish of St.  Mary Magdalen, Southwark, Gardiner. Taken upon Oath before me one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County and Liberty. 
Sweareth,
 THAT in the Month of May last, past this Informant was a Tun-Man in Her Majesty's Brewhouse, called the Hartshorn Brew-house in St. Katherine's, that Richard Warren Miller to the said Brew house, by Order of Mr. Croker Workman Brewer, did at each Brewing, after the second Running, take out of the Mash-Tun, two Bushels at least of Goods, and carry'd them away. And this Informant further saith, that during the time he work'd in the said Brewhouse, which was about six Weeks, there was at least twelve Tun of Beer, Drank, Spilt, and Imbezel'd. And further saith not.
Subscribed John Watts. Jurat 11. die Feb. 1702. Coram me Rich. Rider Vera Copia. These Affidavits being taken were delivered to the Princes Council, in whose Office they now are: The Parties accused, by Collusion with some others, procur'd one Jery Jones, an ignorant Fellow, that keeps a publick House near the Victualling Office, to apprehend Richard Parrat (one of the Evidences on Oath for the Queen) upon the Affidavit of Thomas Wingfield, and Paul Dewey, and others against whom the said Parrat had given Information upon Oath, and Evidence before the Prince's Council, upon which the said Parrat was committed to Prison, and Bailed out by Hore, and afterwards a Bill was found against him for Fellony at Hickes's-Hall, only upon the foresaid Evidence, who were accused as Criminals by the said Parrat: It is here to be noted the Management of those who would ruin England by the Destruction of the Navy, by letting the Criminals pass with Impunity, and be at Liberty to Swear against such as had made Affidavit against them. 
Hore finding that the Criminals were countenanced, he was resolved to prosecute them, and in order thereunto, took up by Warrant Thomas Wingfield, and Paul Dewey, and they were bound over to the next Sessions at Hicke's-Hall, where they were found guilty of a Misdemeanour only: It is here to be noted, that Jery Jones publickly said, that he prosecuted Parrat by Order of the Princes Council, and that he would if he pleas'd, prosecute all the Queen's Evidence, of which Mr. Tutchin acquainted the Prince's Council, who never made any publick Vindication of their Honour in that respect.
 After this the said Hore took up by Warrant William Ravenscroft, and Randolph Rench, who were bound over as follows.
 Middlesex et Westm. ff. To all Constables, Headboroughs, and others, Her Majesties Officers, whom these may Concern. WHereas Information hath been given upon Oath unto me, one of Her Majesties Justices of the Peace for the said County and Liberty, by Tho. Mattocks, and Richard Parrot, that William Ravenscroft and Randal Rench, Persons belonging to Her Majesties Victualling, hath of late Defrauded and Cheated Her said Majesty, by taking and bearing away several pieces of Beef and Pork out of Her Majesties Cutting-House, in manifest breach of their good Behaviour: 
These are therefore in Her Majesties Name, to Will and Require you, upon sight hereof, to take and bring before me, or some other of Her Majesties Justices of the Peace for the said County and Liberty, the Bodies of the said  William Ravenscroft and  Randal Rench, of whom you shall have Notice to Answer to the Premises: Thereof fail not. Given under my Hand and Seal, this 25th Day of March 1703.
Richard Rider. March 26. Balr. Cod. Robert Bateman. April 3. 1703. Right Honourable, MY Humble Request to Your Honours, for the Queens Interest is, That you will be pleased to Order Your Sollicitor to attend at Hicks's-Hall with the Original Affidavits; and that Your Secretary, or other Person, as Your Honours shall think fit, do attend at the Sessions-House in the Old-Bayly, with the Minutes and Proceedings of Your Board, in relation to the Victuallers. I am forced to be at the Charge of Prosecution, finding the Commissioners of the Victualling encourage the Poysoners of our Seamen, by continuing them in their Employments. I shall Prosecute all the rest in due time; and had Prosecuted Commissioner Wright this Sessions; but my Counsel tells me, that is to be done, only by Your Honours, he being the Queens Officer under you. I am 
 Right Honourable, Your Honours most Humble Servant, Charles Hore. April 13. 1703. Right Honourable, I Thought it adviseable to Acquaint Your Honours of my Proceedings in the Prosecution of the Criminals in the Victualling Office. I got Bills found against eight of them for a high Misdemeanor this Sessions; and I intend to Try them the next; and am now Prosecuting the rest of the Criminals. Your Honours are sensible of the great Charge I have already been at in this Affair, in which I have spent my own Money, and have been forced to Borrow of Friends. I therefore humbly Beg Your Honours to take my Case into Consideration, and to Order me a supply for further Prosecution, that Her Majesties and the Nations Cause may not be starv'd for want of Money: In which Your Honours will do a singular Service to Her Majesty, to Your Country, and will highly Oblige, 
 Right Honourable, Your Honours most humble Servant, Charles Hore. April 17. 1703. Honoured Sir, I Was Yesterday to wait on the Attorney General, in Order to the Clearing of Richard Parrat. The Attorney General said it was a very ill thing the Queens Evidence should be used at that rate, and said if the Prince's Council would signifie to him, That the said Parrat was the Queens Witness, and that his Discharge was necessary for the Service, he would immediately clear him, notwithstanding the Indictment against him. I would therefore beg You to move the Council in this Affair. I having great Occasion for his Evidence in that Service. I am 
 Your most humble Servant, Charles Hore. April 17. 1703. Honoured Sir, I Sent a Letter to the Board this Day, relating to the Discharge of Richard Parrat; but having no Answer, and Mr. Baker telling me I cannot speak with the Board. I beg the Favour of you to move the Council for an Answer; the Affair requiring Expedition. I am 
 Sir, Your most humble Servant, Charles Hore. The Answer given to Hore by Mr. Clark, was, That their Honours could do nothing in the matter, and the Law must have its course.
April 19. 1703. Right Honourable, I Received Your Honours Answer to my Request for the Discharge of Richard Parrat, whom Your Honours were pleased not to Discharge, tho' he is the Queens Evidence, and is Malitiously Prosecuted for being so. It seemed very odd to some true English Gentlemen, that the Criminals in the Victualling, and such as have Endeavoured to poyson the Sailors of England, with Meazly and Stinking Hogs, should be continued in their mischievous Employment, after Affidavit was made against them by Your Honours Order. I now acquaint Your Honours that some, if not all of the Persons, against whom Bills were found the last Sessions, are still Employ'd in the Victualling. I leave it to Your Honours Consideration whether This be a Practice suitable to the true Service of our Country, and whether it be not a great Encouragment to Criminals. I am, 
 Right Honourable, Your Honours most humble Servant, Charles Hore. Admiralty Office 26 Feb. 1703. Mr. Hore, I Send this to acquaint you, that His Royal Highness has given Orders to Sir Cloudsley Shovel, and Sir Richard Haddock, to go on with the Survey of the Sea Provisions at the Victualling Office; in case you do not, with such Persons as you think proper to attend them in Four Days. I am 
 Sir, Your humble Servant, J. Burchet. For the Reason before mentioned in Hores Letter he could not go on this Survey.
Navy Office 28. April. 1703. at Two in the Afternoon. Mr. Hore, HIS Royal Highness, upon a Petition of yours setting forth several Frauds and Abuses in the Victualling-Office, with Respect to the Badness of Provisions Killed for the Seamen of the Fleet, and other particulars; having Commanded us, whose Names are here under Subscrib'd, strictly to Examine into the same, and with all Expedition return to His Highness a true and perfect Account what we find relating to your said Petition: That our Report accordingly may be more satisfactory to His Highness, and in Justice to your self: We do therefore hereby Advertise and Desire you, pursuant to His Highnesses Order, to meet us at the Victualling-Office on Tower-Hill to Morrow Morning, being the 29th Instant; precisely at Nine of the Clock, with all such Persons you shall think proper or necessary to be with you at the same time on this occasion. 
Your Friends Carmarthen, Henry Greenhill. April 29. 1703. My Lord, I Receiv'd a Letter from Your Lordship, Intimating Your Lordship, and Others, were going to a Survey of the Provisions at Tower-Hill, according to the Prayer of my Petition. I humbly Conceive my self not concerned in the Survey; my Petition, praying for a Survey of three Months ago; and I know not upon what Reasons it has been so long Neglected. Mr. Tutchin Survey'd the Pickle near that time, and Engages to prove from the Quantity of the Pickle, that the Meat is not fit for the Service. I would not have Your Lordship imagine I do not attend Your Lordship on this Occasion out of any Disrespect. Your Lordship may at any time, for the Service of our Country, Command the Person of 
 My Lord, Your Lordships Most Humble Servant Charles Hore. April 29. 1703. Right Honourable, I Receiving a Letter from my Lord Marquess of Carmarthen, importing that Himself and several others were, by Order of the Prince's Councel, to Survey the Provisions of the Fleet, on the 29th of April; I went that Day to the Red-House at Deptford, where most of the Bad Provisions has been Laid, but found none of the said Surveyors there, but I found there Jeremy Eaton, (One of the Persons against whom the Bill was found last Sessions) Employed; I don't say in Poisoning the Provisions for the Fleet. I have further to Signify to Your Honours, that I have Information of two Galleons Laden with Flesh for the Fleet, which are now in long Reach, which Provisions are said to be Bad. This is all from, 
Right Honourable, Your most humble Servant Charles Hore. The Report of the Surveyors. Sir, IN Obedience to the Command of His Royal Highness, Dated the 23d of April past, and of the Order of His Highnesses Council, of the 30th of Decem. sent us with Your Letter of the said Date. 
We, whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, have this Day carefully Inspected into Her Majesties Provisions, both at the Victualling-Office at Tower-Hill, and at the several Store-Houses by the Brew-house; as also at the Victualling-Office at Deptford; in all which Offices and Store-Houses we Promiscuously Examin'd into a great Number of Casks both of Beef and Pork, as the Inclosed will particularly inform you, and finding it extraordinary good, and a great Stock of it, therefore 'tis our Opinion, having made the strictest Enquiry we could into the Particulars of the Frauds and Abuses in the Victualling-Office, mentioned in Mr. Hore's Petition, that there is no Ground for the Complaint made by him: But on the contrary, we found the Provisions in each Spiece we Survey'd, not only extreamly good, but all things relating to the said Office in the greatest Order imaginable; which, with all Duty and Respect, we Pray may be humbly Represented to His Royal Highness. We are 
 Sir, Your very Humble Servants Carmarthen, R. Haddock, Tho. Hobson, Henry Greenhill, Henry Risbe, Samuel Atkinson, John Hazlewood, B. Allen, Lewis Hughes, William Beanes. Hore having a Copy of this Survey, drew up the following Protest, and Delivered it to the Princes Council.
Gentlemen, HAving Read a Copy of the Survey, made by the Marquess of Carmarthen, and Others at Her Majesties Victualling-Office; and finding the same highly Prejudicial to Her Majesties Service, the Welfare of the Navy, and the Interest of the Realm. I do hereby Protest against the said Survey for the Reasons Following. 
1. Because the Prayer of my Petition, desired a Survey of the said Provisions about Three Months ago, during which time the Defective Provisions were issued; and the Survey not made till the beginning of May; so that the Victuallers had time to New Pickle and put the Stores in Order for a Survey.
 2. Because the Survey was made by Persons not Skilled in the Pickling, and Curing of Provisions; as having been never Exercised in that Service.
 3. Because in their Report, they only give their Peremptory Opinion, without any Reason thereof drawn from the Nature of the Pickle and Packing the Meat: Whereas I can prove that the Pickle used in the Service this Season, hath sometimes been two Degrees and an half too Strong, and at other times three or four Degrees too Weak.
 4. Because they did not Survey the Provisions in all the Store-Houses.
 5. Because they Report, that they have made the Strictest Enquiry into the Frauds and Abuses in the Victualling-Office, mentioned in my Petition; that it is their Opinion, that there is no Ground for the Complaint made by me: When as I never knew the merit of my Complaint was Refer'd to their Consideration; And if so, they heard the Cause Ex Porte, against the Queen, as having not Examined my Evidence, as to the Embezelments of the Stores. All which I Humbly Conceiving does tend to the Prejudice of Her Majesties Service, and the Stifling of the Complaint made by me: I do therefore Protest against the said Survey for the Reasons above, and desire that the said Protest may be delivered to His Royal Highness, and Entred in the Books of the Admiralty,
 Charles Hore.The said Hore being resolv'd to Prosecute the aforesaid Criminals, they made Interest to the Attorney General, to procure a Noli Prosequi for themselves, as appears by the following Summons.
 LET Mr. Charles Hore, the Prosecutor, on three several Indictments, Prefer'd at the Sessions in Hick's-hall, in April last, viz. One against Paul Dewey and others; Another against Randolph Rench, and a Third against John Bull and others, for Imbezelling Her Majesties Stores and Victualls. Attend me at my Chambers in the Temple onMonday the Tenth Day of this Instant May, at Four of the Clock in the Afternoon, to shew Cause why a Noli Prosequi should not be Granted to stay all further Proceedings on the said Indictments. Dated this Sixth Day of May 1703. 
Edward Northey. May 8. 1703. Right Honourable, I Being Summoned to attend the Attorney General on Monday next, at Four of the Clock in the Afternoon, I desire Your Solicitor may Attend at that time with the Original Affidavits relating to my Complaint against the Victuallers; as also, That Your Honours will be Pleased to Order me a Copy of the Report of the Survey made by my Lord Carmarthern and Others.
To the Right Honourable the Council, to His Royal Highness. Right Honourable, I am Your Honours most humble Servant Charles Hore. The said Hore percieving by these Measures that the Intent of some People was to stifle the Complaint, by clearing the Criminals without Trial, and believing that neither the Queen nor His Royal Highness were throughly Inform'd of the Merits of his Cause, and the Nature of his Complaint, he Petitioned Her Majesty as follows,
To the QUEENS most Excellent Majesty in Council. The Humble Petition of Charles Hore. Sheweth,
 THAT your Petitioner some time since made a Discovery of great Frauds and Abuses in the Victualing your Majesties Navy, by Embezelling the Provisions, and Applying the best of the Meat to Private Uses: As also by Cutting and Packing up great Numbers of Meazled Hogs, and Hogs brought Dead and Stinking into the Office, contrary to the Rules of the Navy, and Laws of the Land; all which fully appeared by the Depositions of several Witnesses now remaining at the Admiralty Office. 
That to prevent the Discovery and Punishments of the said Frauds, some Ill Affected Persons to Your Majesties Government caused one Richard Parrot, (who is a very Material Witness, and hath given Evidence for Your Majesty before the Prince's Council) to be taken up and Prosecuted upon pretence of Imbezelling Your Majesties Stores, upon the Information of two of the Persons, against whom the said Parrot had before given Evidence at the Admiralty Board.
 That Your Petitioner hath at his own proper Charges Prosecuted several Offenders, and Indictments were found against Eight of them the last Sessions, (Two of them being the same Persons on whose Information the said Parrot was taken up.) 
That Your Petitioner doubts not to Convict the said Offenders, and Divers others, who he intends to Prosecute for the said Crimes, if the Evidence of the said Parrot, (whom at present is forced to Abscond, by Reason of the said Malicious Prosecution against him) be not Supprest and Stifled.
 That without a speedy and Effectual Examination into, and Exemplary Punishment of the Offenders for the said Crimes (which Your Petitioner hath great Cause to believe, hath Cost the Lives of Thousands of Seamen in Your Majesties Service) it will be Impossible to prevent the like Evil Practices for the Future; which being a Matter of great Importance to Your Majesties Service.
 Your Petitioner therefore Humbly Prays that Your Majesty will be Graciously Pleased to Grant a Noli Prosequi for the said Parrot, that he may be Enabled to appear and give Evidence upon the said Tryal of the said Offenders, at the next Ensuing Sessions (whereby Your Petitioner will be Encourag'd to make further Discoveries of many other Frauds and Abuses in the Victualling Your Majesties Navy.) And that Your Petitioner may be heard by His Councel before this Honourable Board Touching the Premises. 
And Your Petitioner, as in Duty Bound, shall ever Pray. Charles Hore. At the Court at St. James's, the 8th of May, 1703. Present The QUEENS most Excellent Majesty in Council. 
UPon Reading this Day, at the Board, the Petition of Charles Hore, relating to the Discovery of the great Frauds and Abuses in the Victualling of Her Majesties Navy; humbly Praying a Noli Prosequi, for Richard Parrot, whom the Petitioner alledges to be a very Material Witness in the Case, and is taken Up and Prosecuted for Pretence of Imbezzelling Her Majesties Stores, to the end he may appear and give Evidence upon the Tryal of the Offenders, at the next Ensuing Sessions: It is Ordered by Her Majesty in Council, that it be, as it is hereby referr'd, to Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Solicitor General, to Examine the matter of the said Petition; a Copy whereof is hereunto Annexed, and to report to this Board how they find the same, together with their Opinion thereupon. 
John Povey. PUrsuant to Her Majesties Order, in Council, of the 8th of May, Instant. We do appoint to Consider of the matter of the Petition of Charles Hore, (relating to a Discovery of Frauds and Abuses in the Victualling of Her Majesties Navy) and Praying a Noli Prosequi for Richard Parrot, therein mention'd, to us thereby refer'd, upon Tuesday the 25th Instant, at Six of the Clock in the Afternoon, at Mr. Attorney Generals Chamber in the Temple, at which Time and Place we will consider also of the several Indictments against Randal Rench, and against John Bull, John Hoskins, and others, and also against Paul Dewey, alias Dewell, Thomas Wingfield, and William Ravenscroft, for Imbezzelling Her Majesties Stores and Provisions; whereof let the Parties Concerned have Notice, and let Notice be also given to the Commissioners for Victualling the Navy, or their Solicitor, of the said Appointment. Dated the 21st of May 1703. 
Edward Northey. Simon Harcourt. Hore and the Parties mentioned in this Summons, appear'd according to Order, and what pass'd at that time, being too tedious to mention in this place, yet it is worthy the Enquiry of our Representatives. But thus much may be said, That notwithstanding the strictness of Her Majesties Order for a Report of this Affair to be made to the Council Board, That no Report has as yet been made by the Attorney and Sollicitor General. 
The said Hore observing that the said Marquis of Carmarthen and others, had Reported, That they, Pursuant to the Order of His Royal Highness, had Survey'd the Stores belonging to Her Majesties Victualling-Office: And he, that said Hore, understanding that a considerable quantity of the Queens Provisions was Conceal'd in a Ware-House at Cuckolds-Point, not belonging to Her Majesties Victualling-Office, and Suspecting the same to be Embezzeled, he procured the following Warrant for Securing the said Provisions.
 To all Headburroughs and Others of Her Majesties Officers, whom these may Concern. WHereas Complaint, upon Oath, hath been this Day made unto me, One of Her Majesties Justices of the Peace for the said County, by Henry Broom, that he saw this Day in a Ware-House, at Rotherhith in this County, divers Casks wherein is Contained (as he supposes) a Considerable Quantity of Her Majesties Stores, that were Embezzeled, Contrary to the Statutes in that Case made and Provided. 
These are, therefore, in Her Majesties Name, to Will and Require you, or some one of you upon sight thereof, to make Diligent Search in the Day time for the said Stores: And if upon your Search, you find any of the said Stores, or any Person or Persons, of whom you shall have just Cause of Suspicion, that then you secure the said Stores, and the Person or Persons, in whose Custody the same shall be so found; and him, or them bring before me, or before some other of Her Majesties Justices of the Peace for the said County, to be Examined Touching the Premises; and further to be Dealt withall according to the Law. Hereof fail not at your Perils. Given under my Hand and Seal the 18th, Day of  June 1703. 
Ralph Hartley. The said Hore, having served the said Provisions for the Use of Her Majesty, He Wrote the following Letter to the Prince's Council.
June 19. 1703. Gentlemen, I Thought fit to signifie to Your Honours that I have caused to be seized several Hundred Tuns of the Queens Provisions in Ware-Houses at Cuckolds-Point, which I suppose are Imbezzel'd; because they did not appear in the late Survey; I only Intimate this for Your Honours Consideration, who am 
Your Honours Most Humble Servant, Charles Hore. The said Hore being resolved throughly to acquaint Her Majesty with these Evil Practices, he again Petitioned Her Majesty as follows.
To the QUEENS Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of Charles Hore. Sheweth,
 THAT Your Petitioner some time since presented to Your Majesty a Petition relating to a Discovery of Sinister Practices in the Victualling-Office, to the prejudice of Your Majesties Government, and the Abuse of Your Seamen; which said Petition Your Majesty was Graciously pleased to refer to the Consideration of the Attorney and Solicitor General: And Your Petitioner having since that Time seized a vast Quantity of Your Majesties Provisions concealed in private Ware-Houses, which said Provisions are Stinking and unfit for the Nations Service, and supposed to be Imbezzel'd. And Your Petitioner having Notice of several other of Your Majesties Stores belonging to the Victualling, which are after the said manner concealed; as also of a Galleon Laden with Tainted and Defective Provisions for the use of Your Majesties Navy. 
Your Petitioner humbly prays Your Majesties Countenance, Power, and Direction to proceed in the Premises, for the Good of Your Majesties Navy, and the Welfare of the Kingdom. 
And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, &c. Charles Hore. At the Court near Hampton-Court, the 24th Day of June, 1703. Present The QUEENS Most Excellent Majesty in Council. 
UPon Reading this Day at the Board, the Humble Petition of Charles Hore, setting forth that he formerly made a Discovery of Sinister Practices in the Victualling-Office to the prejudice of Her Majesties Government, and the Abuse of the Seamen; and hath lately seized a vast Quantity of Her Majesties Provisions belonging to the Victualling-Office, concealed in private Ware-Houses, which is supposed to be Embezzelled; and hath Notice of several other Stores concealed after the same manner; and therefore praying Her Majesties Countenance, Power, and Direction therein; It is ordered by Her Majesty in Council, that it be, and it is, hereby referred to His Royal Highness, Lord High Admiral, to cause the Petitioners Allegations to be Examined, and to Report to Her Majesty in Council how He finds the same, with His Opinion thereupon. 
John Povey. It is here to be Noted, that tho' Hore Petitioned the Queen for the good of the Publick; yet he was forced to pay the full Charge for all the Orders of Council, as if he had Petitioned on his own private Account.
 The said Hore believing himself not fairly Treated in his Discovery by the Prince's Council, he Petitioned His Royal Highness to be heard by himself, as follows.
To His Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark, Lord High Admiral of England, Ireland, &c. The Humble Petition of Charles Hore. Sheweth,
 THat after Sir Richard Haddock, and Mr. Henry Greenhill, and others, by Order of Your Royal Highness, had Surveyed Her Majesties Stores and Provisions at the Victualling-Office, and in and about the Port of London; and a Report was given in to Your Royal Highnesses Council, that the said Stores were Extreamly Good, and fit for Her Majesties Service: Your Petitioner being assured of the Contrary, the said Surveyors having not Examined into all Her Majesties Stores, but that Considerable part of the said Stores were Concealed in Private Ware-Houses, did protest against the said Survey, a Copy whereof he delivered in at the Admiralty Board, to be Transmitted to Your Royal Highness. 
Your Petitioner afterwards Petitioned Her Most Excellent Majesty in Council, setting forth several great Hardships to Her Majesties good Subjects, who had given Information in Relation to several Discoveries of several Frauds and Abuses Committed in Her Majesties Victualling Office: And Her Majesty was Graciously Pleased to Refer the Petition aforesaid, to the Consideration of the Attorney and Solicitor General, who, upon hearing the whole matter, Declared, the Allegations in the Petition were fully proved; tho' not yet Reported to Her Majesty in Council.
 Your Petitioner in the mean Time (being Zealous and Resolute in Her Majesties Service) Procured a Warrant from a Justice of Peace to Seize, and accordingly hath Seized several Hundreds of Tuns of Her Majesties Provisions in Ware-Houses, at Cuckolds-Point: Supposed to be Concealed and Embezzel'd.
 Whereupon Your Petitioner again Petitioned Her Majesty in Council for Her Power, Countenance and Direction in the Affair: And Her Majesty was Pleased to Refer the whole to Your Royal Highnesses Consideration, which Order of Reference is herewith Humbly Presented to Your Royal Highness.
 Your Petitioner therefore most Humbly Prays, that Your Royal Highness will be Pleased to Hear the Matter of the said Complaint Personally; and Grant Your Petitioner Full Power and Authority to Seize other suspected Stores, and Examine those already Seized without Disturbance or Peril, that speedy Justice may be done Her Majesty and Government in this Particular. 
And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, &c. Charles Hore.The Commanders of the Victualling Office, having appointed a Day for Surveying the Provisions at Cuckolds-Point. The said Hore, with some Friends, attend at the Survey, and found the Provisions Stinking and unfit for Service, as appears by the following Report. 
 The Report of us, whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, being Inhabitants within the City and Liberty of Westminster, Touching a Survey of Sea Provisions (intended for Her Majesties Service) made on the 17th and 19th of July, 1703. In a Private Ware-House, at or near Cuckolds-Point, which Provisions were seized (as supposed) to be Embezzel'd from Her Majesties Stores. 
THat upon Inspection of the Provisions aforesaid, the Major Part of them Appeared to us, to the best of our Judgement and Knowledge, to be killed since Michaelmas last, (tho' at this time they are Stinking) and are altogether unfit for Her Majesties Service; for this Reason, that upon opening the Casks, the Pickle appeared to be in a manner all Blood, which was Stinking and very Offensive; and the Flesh appeared to be Fresh, as if it had not been Salted above two Months: The Dammage of which Provisions is Occasioned for want of due care in Salting and Packing them; the Blood never having been Drained, nor the Salt ever Penetrated the Flesh: Whereas every Cock-Wench knows, that Flesh not mov'd or Repackt out of the Bloody Pickle, can never keep sweet six Months. 
We further declare that during the time of the said Survey, one Skipper Holman pretended he had bought the said Provisions and said that all were Rogues who came there, especially Mr. Hore, whose Ears he swore he would cut off, and Arrest him for fivePound a Day, for every Day he waited there, being so much out of his way, and was very Impertinent and Troublesome. And one Mr. Cole, the Master Cooper of the Victualing Office; and likewise Mr. Jennings, one of the Commissioners, pretended the said Provisions were Condemned at Portsmouth, and sent up hither, and Repackt out of good Husbandry, to serve as petty Warrant Provisions for new Imprest Men Aboard the Tenders, with such like Various Discourses. But we Humbly Presume, stinking Provisions are never designed by Her Majesty and Government, or Imprest Men, or the West-Indies, or to destroy any of Her Subjects, in any of Her Majesties Dominions, Here or Elsewhere.
 Charles Hore. Charles Read, William Eastiss.The said Hore Understanding that the Prince's Council had made a Report of this Survey to Her Majesty, without Examining the said Hore, and his Friends that were present at the Survey; and he the said Hore, not being able by any means to procure a Copy of the said Report to Her Majesty: He delivered a third Petition to Her Majesty at Hampton-Court, as follows.
 To the QUEENS Most Excellent Majesty in Council. The Humble Petition of Charles Hore. Sheweth,
 THat Your Petitioner some time since presented to Your Gracious Majesty a Petition, Relating to a Discovery of Sinister Practices in the Victualling Office, to the prejudice of Your Majesties Government, and the Abuse of Your Seamen; which was Referr'd to the Attorney and Solicitor General, who Owned the Allegations proved; yet no Report was given by them, as was Ordered by Your Majesty in Council; whereupon a second Petition was preferr'd, concerning an Imperfect Survey made by Sir Richard Haddock, and others; as also setting forth the seizing some Private Ware-Houses, and Requesting Power and Protection to seize others, which said Petition Your Majesty was Graciously pleas'd to Refer to the Consideration of His Royal Highness, Lord High Admiral; and Your Petitioner upon Enquiry at the Admiralty Board, what they had done with the Reference to His Royal Highness; was answered by the said Board, that they would give in their Report in two or three Days, and your Petitioner Replyed, who could their Honours give their Report, having not heard any Evidences since February last, to which the Board answer'd, it was no matter; Your Petitioner notwithstanding Resolved to proceed to take an Account of one of the Warehouses he had seized at Cuckolds-Point by Virtue of a Warrant from a Justice of Peace and upon strict Survey found the Provisions stinking and unfit for Your Majesties Service, tho' not Kill'd above six Months, as appears from the Report hereunto Annext, and Your Petitioner has good Grounds to believe that several other of Your Majesties Stores belonging to the said Office would be found as Defective upon a new Survey made by fitting Persons. And if Your Petitioner might be heard by Council before Your Majesty in Council, all his Allegations would plainly appear touching the Abuses and Mismanagement in the Victualling Your Majesties Navy. 
Wherefore Your Petitioner most Humbly Prays that Your Majesty will be Graciously Pleased to admit the whole matter to be heard by his Council before Your Majesty in Council that the full Discovery of the said Abuses and Mismanagements of the VictualingOffice may be no longer stiffled, but made Clearly and Evidently appear to Your most Gracious Majesty for the Good of Your Majesties Navy, and the Welfare of the Kingdom.
And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray. Charles Hore. To this Petition was Annexed the abovesaid Report; but the said Hore never had any Answer thereunto.
 Now in all Humility he lays this whole Proceeding before our Representatives in Parliament, to be Considered as in their great Wisdom they shall think fit. 
FINIS. 
