THE Continuation of the Case between Sir WILLIAM COURTEN, his Heyres and Assignes, And the EASTINDIA COMPANY of the Netherlands, Concerning the Shipps BONAESPERANZA and HENRY BONADVENTURE, To the 23. of December 1673. ------ With some Considerations annexed and Objections Answered. ------ Recollected by E.W. for satisfaction of all Persons concerned. ------  ------ Printed in the Year 1673.
 The Continuation of the case between Sir William Courten, his Heyrs and Assigns, and the East-India Company of the Netherlands, concerning the Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura. With some Considerations and Objections answered. SIr William Courten late of London Merchant, Endimion Porter, Esquire, John Weddal, Nathaniel Mountney, George Townesend, Thomas Kynnaston, Merchants, and divers others Participants with them, set forth severall great Shipps, laden with money and Marchandizes, for the Coast of India, China & Japan the Years 1636. 1637. & following Years, for trading voyages persuant to their letters Patents under the great Seal of England. 
After the death of Sir William Courten, William Courten his Son and Heir, and the surviving Partners, set forth the said Ships Bona Esperanza & Henry Bonadventura (inter alia) in the Year 1641. for supply of their Factories, and to bring home their Effects from India and Parts adjacent.
 Afterwards William Courten being indebted to divers Persons, in severall great sommes of Money, amounting unto 100000. Pounds and upwards, for which Sir Edward Littleton, his Brother in law, stood obliged; The said William Courten did by his indenture and Bill of sale dated the 26. day of April 1642. graunt and assign all his Interest and share of stock in the said Ships and Factories in India to Sir Edward Littleton, for his indemptnity from the said debts, provided the surplus should be returned to the said Courten.
 Afterwards William Courten and Sir Edward Littleton, reciting the first Bill of sale and a great debt of 24800 Pounds due to Sir Paul Pindar, they graunt and assign unto Sir Paul all their Interest and share of stock, in the Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura with all Freights, and proceeds by a tripartite Indenture and Bill of Sale dated the 19. of December 1642. Provided that the surplus should be applyed towards the discharge of Sir Edward Littleton's engagements.
 On the 25. of June in the Year 1643, the said Ship Bona Esperanza with her lading, was taken in an hostile manner in the Streights of Mallacca, in her passage from Goa towards Maccao in China, by two Ships of Warr called the Vendilo and Portogallo, commanded by Captain Vermeerren and Captain Geeland (and the Lieutenant of the Fort at Mallacca) belonging to the East-India Company of the Netherlands, under a pretence that Mr. Courten and his Partners, traded with the Portugalls their Ennemies, notwithstanding there was a Truce made between the King of Portugall, and the States Generall, for ten Years in all parts of the Indies and Europe, which was concluded at the Hague on the 12. of June 1641. by Don Tristao de Mendoca Furtado, Embassadour from Don Iuan King of Portugall.
 In the same Year 1643. the Officers of the said East-India Company toke the Ship Henry Bonadventura with her lading into their possession, near the Island Mauritius, and converted both the Ships and Goods to their own use, to the loss and dammage of Mr. Courten and his Assigns, and the rest of the Partners, the summe of 85000 Pound Sterling, as by the proofs taken in the High Court of Admirallity in England appears.
 On the 5. of September 1644, the Proprietors having addressed themselves to the High Court of Admirallity, and procured an Admonition to be given unto Monsr. Albertus Ioachimy, the States Embassadour then resident in England, Intimating that they intended to examine Witnesses, in perpetuam rei memoriam, concerning the spoyls and dammages of the said Ships and lading; Which Admonition was also affixed upon one of the Pillars of the Royall Exchange, where it remayned eight dayes publickly, to the end that the East-India Company of the Netherlands, or any Person for them, might retain a Proctor to cross examine any of the said Witnesses if they pleased.
 In the Year 1647. Sir Paul Pindar makes a Procuration or Letter of attorney to Jonas Abeels of Amsterdam Merchant, dated the 11. of February 1647/8. old Stile, and also sent him an authentick Copie of the said tripartite indenture, attested by Iosua Maniet of London Publicq Notary.
 In the Year following William Courten being insolvent by reason of other losses, absented himself and went privately to the Hague to Mr. Iacob Pergens, who was not ignorant of the Premises in every circumstance, having received the particulars of the dammages amounting unto 85000. Pound, yet nevertheless to imbroil the Subjects of both Nations, he perswaded Mr. Courten to make another Bill of sale dated the 22. of February 1647/8. reciting therein that Mr. Courten being indebted to the said Mr. Pergens in severall summes of monie, he graunted and assigned all his right and interest in the said Ships and lading to him the said Pergens, Provided that Pergens should pay the surplus over and above his pretended debt to such person and persons lawfully clayming under Courten, which bill of sale was signed by William Courten and Iacob Pergens, and attested by Dominique Coulyn, David Goubard, and Salomon van der Heyde Publicq Notary in the Hague.
 In the moneth of May following Gerrit Coren Publicq Notary at Amsterdam by order of Ionas Abeels, insinuated his Procuration from Sir Paul Pindar and the Originall bill of sale from William Courten and Sir Edward Littleton, to the Directors of the East India Company, interdicting their payment of any monie for Courtens share and stock in the Shipps and lading aforesaid to any person or persons whatsoever, but unto the said Ionas Abeels in right of Sir Paul Pindar, protesting that if they did otherwise it should be no discharge unto them; which insinuation and Protest was done by the said Notary Publicq on the 25. of May 1648. in the Assembly of the said Directors at their Chamber in Amsterdam in the presence of Ian Iansen and Adrian Nys witnesses thereunto.
 In the Moneth of October following, Ionas Abeels caused to be arrested in the hands of the said East India Company alle such summes of mony as should be found due from the said Company concerning the said two Shipps and their lading, that out of the said monies Sir Paul Pindar share and proportion should be paid in the first place to him the said Ionas Abeels in his quallity; which Arrest was made the first of October 1648. by Goosen Daniels Bode or Messenger; And a second Arrest was made by Willem Iansen Bode or Messenger, in November following both which the Court declared to be valid.
 Notwithstanding all these Admonitions and proceedings the Directors of the East India Company at their Chamber in Middelburgh on the 18. of September 1649. made an underhand agreement with the said Iacob Pergens for 85000. gilders upon Caution given by the said Iacob Pergens and Peter Boudaen Courten of Middelburgh Marchant to save the said Company harmeles and indempnified from Sir Paul Pindar and others concerning the said Monie or any after claymes.
 Ionas Abeels on the 17. of May 1650. understanding of the underhand agreement at Middelburgh, summons the Directors of th' East India Company before the Magistrates of Amsterdam, and declares against them that they should be condemned to pay the 85000. gilders to him in right of Sir Paul Pindar with dammages for the same untill effectuall payment.
 Then the Directors of th' East India Company summoned Iacob Pergens, and Peter Boudaen Courten on the 13. of September 1650. to indempnify them from Sr. Paul Pindar for the said money, and free them of all Costs accordingly, as by the Acts of the Court appears. In the same Year 1650. Sir Paul Pindar dyed, and soon after Ionas Abeels dyed also. So the right of Action remained in statu quo.
 In the Year 1654. William Toomes, Executor of Sir Paul Pindar, and severall of the Proprietors and Adventurors, exhibited their claym for the Originall loss and Dammages of 85000 Pound Sterling, before the English and Dutch Commissioners at London, appointed by the Treaty made between Oliver Cromwel and the States Generall, which by a provisoe in the said Treaty was referred to the Protestant Cantons of Switserland, if the said Commissioners did not compose the same within three moneths.
 Afterwards the Proprietors and Adventurors applyed themselves to Mr. Secretary Thurloe, for a Commission to be directed to the Protestant Cantons, who answered that most of the Proprietors being Delinquents by Act of Parlement, for adhering to the late King, and soe they had forfeited their Estates, they could not expect any protection from his Highness Oliver Cromwel, therefore perswaded them to desist from any further Prosecution pro tempore.
 In the Year 1660. upon His Majesty's most happy restauration, severall of the Proprietors and Adventurors on the behalf of themselves, and the rest of the Interessed made their address to Sir Edward Nicholas, Principall Secretary of State, to move His Majesty to recommend their case concerning the Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadvantura to the States Generall for satisfaction and reparation.
 Whereupon Sir Edward Nicholas having informed the King the true state of the case, and also intimated to His Majesty what great services and sufferings Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pindar had undergone for the Crown of England, both in the time of King Iames and the late King, as also of the particular sufferings of Sir Edward Littleton, and severall of the other Proprietors, His Majesty was gratiously pleased to direct his Letter under his sign Manuall to the States Generall, signifying that the said spoils and dammages being committed against the Laws of common Amity, upon his Subjects who had merited so much from the Crown, he Earnestly required the States Generall to make satisfaction to the Persons interessed and injured, according to the proofs made in his high Court of Admirallity, signifying also that he was obliged in Justice and Honour to see it effected accordingly.
 In persuance of which Letter and severall Orders of the Councell-Table for Instructions to Sir George Downing, who was then Envoyé Extraordinary for His Majesty at the Hague, divers Memorialls, Answers and Replyes passed between him and the States Generall in the Year 1662. concerning the said spoils and Dammages of those Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura, wherein the States Generall denyed not the matter of fact, but would have Evaded any other satisfaction to the proprietors and Participants, then what the East India Company by Combination had given to Iacob Pergens upon his fraudulent practise as aforesaid.
 In that Year 1662. the States Generall having instructed Mr. Simon van Hoorn and Mr. Michiel van Gogh their Ambassadours in England, to get the said spoiles and depredations concerning the said Shipps to be mortified and Extinguished in the Treaty then depending at Whitehall, his Majestie declared he would breake of the said treatie unlesse satisfaction and reparation should be made for the said Shipps according to the said Letter of recommendation to the States Generall at the Hague as aforesaid.
 Where upon there was a particular Exception in the 15. Article of the said Treaty, concluded at Whitehall the 4. of September 1662. that the Dammages concerning those two Shipps Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura should not be comprehended in the Extinguishment and mortification of former losses and Injuries in the East Indies, but reserved for reparation according to his Majesties Letters of Recommendation as aforesaid, and Expressed in these words poterint litem inceptam prosequi &c. which agreement was also attested under the Hands and Seales of the late Duke of Albermarle, the Earle of Manchester, the Lord Hollis, the Lord Bartlet, Sir George Carteret, Sir Edward Nicholas and Sir William Morice, Commissioners that Treated with the States Embassadours.
 In the Year following Sir George Downing in persuance of the said Treaty, held a Conference with the Pentionaris Iohn de Wit and the Deputies of the States Generall, in the presence of Mr. Peter van Dam, and two of the Directors of the East India Company in the Chamber of the States Generall to adjust the said Dammages, But in stead therof the Company made severall impertinent interpretations upon the Law of England in the Case of Sir Paul Pindar and Sir Edward Littleton; Notwithstanding the said Company had the Opinions by them under the hands of Sir Iohn Glynn, Sir Iohn Maynard, Sir Edward Turnor and Master Serjeant Baldwynn, affirming that William Courten had nothing in him to grant to Iacob Pergens after the Bills of Sale to Littleton and Pindar, which made them absolute proprietors by the Law of England. Only there was a possibillity left in Courten to call them to Accompt after their debt should be paid, which opinions were also confirmed by Sir Giles Sweit, Sir William Turner, Sir VValter VValker, and Sir Tymothy Baldwyn, Doctors of the Civill Laws, and delivered to Mr. Peter van Dam the Advocate of the East India Company.
 Then Iohn de VVit offred 30000. pound sterling. upon Accompt of all the Proprietors and persons interessed, reserving the Civil right of Action against Iacob Pergens and Peter Boudaen Courten, for the 85000. gilders paid upon their caution as aforesaid, which offer was not satisfactory, so the Generall dispute remayned also in statu quo.
 Afterwards Sir George Downing did by his last Memoriall upon that subject, dated the 24. of October 1664. give the States Generall a peremptory day to make of that business, intimating therein how ill the King resented it to be so slighted, and that his Majestie would not prostitute his Honour any further but Governe himselfe accordingly, yet all proved ineffectuall.
 Then the Proprietors with others addressed themselves with a list of Dammages to the House of Commons in Parliament, the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura being placed in the front of all demands; whereupon the Commons voted to assist his Majestie with their lives and fortunes in acquiring satisfaction and reparation, and soone after a declaration for Generall Reprisalls was ordered by the King and Councell against the States Generall and their Subjects, whereupon severall millions of pounds Sterling were granted to his Majestie in Parliament for the prosecution thereof.
 In the Year following the Earle of Shrewsbury, Sir Iohn VVolstenholme, Sir Iohn Ayton, George Carew and VVilliam Floyd Esquires, and others Interessed, made application to his Majestie by petition for Espetiall Letters of Reprisall to remaine in force against the States Generall and their Subjects, untill the Originall losse and dammages should be reprised which was referred to the Judge of the Admirallity and his Majesties Advocates Generall, and severall other Doctors of the Civill Law, to Examine the whole matter and to reporte their opinion what was fitt for his Majestie to do further for his Subjects reliefe in that Case.
 After severall Consultations and debates had betweene the said referrees Concerning the premises, Doctor Exton then Judge of the Admirallity Court, Sir Robert VViseman, Sir VVilliam Turner, and Sir Timothy Baldwyn, made their report to his Majestie, that in this case of spoiles there was no remedie left but Especiall Reprisalls to continue in force against the States Generall and their Subjects, untill the debt and Dammages (wich they found upon proofes to arise unto the summe of 151612. pound sterling) should be recovered with Costs, or a Composition made for the same betweene the East India Company of the Netherlands and the parties Interessed, whereof the said Company were obliged by the Law of Nations to take notice of.
 In persuance thereof Letters Patents under the Great Seale of England dated the 19. of May 1665. were granted unto Sir Edmond Turnor, and Mr. George Carew (Administrator of Sir Paul Pindar) their Executors Administrators and Assignes on behalfe of them selves and all the Interessed to continue in force accordingly, with this Especiall clause and Provisoe therein contained, that notwithstanding it should happen that a peace and agreement should be made betweene his Majestie and the States Generall for the Generall Reprisalls, yet it should be lawfull for the said Turnor and Carew and their Executors and Assignes, to putt the said Letters Patents in Execution for Especiall Reprisalls from time to time untill they had recovered the said debt of 151612. pounds with all Incident Charges, or that the East India Company of the Netherlands should Compound with the Proprietors and other persons Interessed in the same.
 In the Year 1666. Mr. Iames Boevé delivered a Copie of the said Letters Pattents to Mr. Peter van Dam, at the East India Chamber at Amsterdam, and requested him to move the said Company to compose the said debt and Dammages in an Amicable way rather then to leave it in dispute from Generation to Generation, to the prejudice of the States Generall and their Subjects.
 In the Year 1667. during the Treaty at Breda, the States Generall having suprized the Kings Shipps at Chattam, severall of the Proprietors freinds in the Hague moved the Pentionaris Iohn de Wit, to incite the States of Holland and the East India Company to give some Honorable satisfaction for the Shipps Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura (which had bin so solemnely debated in former Treaties) being more for the Interest of their Country then to insist upon such scandalous Articles as they had framed and sent to Breda concerning the said Dammages, which could not extinguish the debt or make void the Letters Patents, to Turnor and Carew any more then to disannull the 35. Article of the States Patent to the East India Company of the Netherlands, whereby they make peace and Warre with all Princes and States whatsoever at their pleasure from the Cape Bon Esperanza to the Streights of Magelanus, yet Iohn de Wit and his Complices persisted in their projects, and would not hearken to any other advice.
 In the Year 1671. the States Generall having made severall Breaches of the Treaty at Breda, and denyed Common Justice to his Majesties Subjects in their ordinary Courts of Judicature in Holland and Zeland, severall of the proprietors and Interessed Persons in the said debt and Dammages, made fresh applications to his Majestie by petition, and prayed that his Majestie would please to insist upon reparation and satisfaction in an Extraordinary way according to the merits of their causes, and Espetially for the debt of 151612. pounds ascertained under the Greate Seale of England as aforesaid, which said petition was by order of Councell referred to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury and the two principall Secretaries of State, who made a report to his Majestie, that the States Generall having bin refractory in severall Articles of the Treaty at Breda, his Majestie and his Subjects were at libertie both in justice and Equity to require full satisfaction and reparation in Mr. Courtens Case, notwithstanding the said Treaty at Breda.
 In persuance thereof his Majestie was gratiously pleased on the 7. of July 1672. to recommend the debt of 151612. pound with Dammages by his Letter under his signe Manuall sent by the said George Carew to his Grace George Duke of Buckingham, and the Right Honorable Henry Earle of Arlington, his Majesties Plenipotentiaries and Embassadours Extraordinary to the French King and the States Generall then upon a Treaty at Uytrecht, commanding the said Plenipotentiaries to insist upon satisfaction accordingly; declaring therein his care to protect his Subjects in their Just rights as well as to assist them in the recovery thereof. But the said Treaty taking no effect, the said Plenipotentiaries removed from Uytrecht before Mr. Carew arrived at Amsterdam. Then Mr. Carew returning for England in Company with Mr. John Sherland the Fiscall Generall by order of the States of Holland Committed them both to Prison on the 6/16. of August 1672. as Criminalls upon pretence they were Ennemies to the Country, and Charged Mr. Carew as a seditious person in seeking after Justice in the premises, and detayned them both close prisoners in the gevangen port, where they are subject to many affronts and reproaches upon every encounter and Alarum in the Countrey, and also obstructed in the Just prosecution of the debt and Dammages aforesaid, which is by an Especiall order of the Councell board dated at Whitehall the 2. of May 1673. recommended to the Lords Embassadours Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries at Cologne, intimating therein that the case of the Adventurors and Creditors of Sir William Courten being already fully stated should be first insisted upon in the list of all Complaints, wherefore the Letters Patents were exemplified and sent to Cologne accordingly, a true Copie thereof here after followes. ------ ------ ------
 A Copie of the Letters Patents for Especiall Reprisall from the King of Great Brittain, under the Great Seale of England, against the States Generall and their Subjects, (enrolled in Chancery Anno 1665.) CHARLES the second by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defendour of the Faith &c. To all Christian People to whom these presents shall come, Greeting: Whereas our loving Subject William Courten Esquire deceased, and his Partners anno 1643. by the depredation and hostile act of one Geland, Commander in chief of two Ships belonging to the East-India Company of the Netherlands, was between Goa and Maccao in the Streights of Mallacca, deprived and most injuriously spoiled of a certain Ship named the Bona Esperanza, and of her Takle, Apparrell, and Furniture, and all the Goods and Lading in her, upon a very hopefull trading Voyage to China, which were carryed to Batavia and there all de facto without due Processe of Law confiscated; And that also in the same Year another laden Ship of Our said Subject, called the Henry Bonadventure, being come on ground nere the Island Mauritius, was there both Ship and Goods seized upon by some of the Officers and Ministers, & others under the command of the said East-India Company, and utterly deteined from the right Owners. And Whereas the said William Courten and his Assigns in his life time used all possible endeavours to recover the said Ships and Goods, and to procure further Justice against the Malefactours, and yet could obtain no restitution or satisfaction, whereby they became to be much distressed and utterly undone in their Estate and Credit: And that thereupon and upon the most humble supplication and Adresses of Francis Earle of Shrewsbury, and William Courten Esquire, Sonne and Heir of the said Sir William deceased, Sir John Ayton and Sir Edmond Turnor Knights, George Carew and Charles Whittaker Esquires, on the behalf of themselves and divers others interessed in the said two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura, and in the Estates of the said Sir William Courten deceased, Sir Edward Littleton Barronet, and Sir Paul Pyndar Knight deceased, that We would take their Case into Our Princely consideracion. We out of a just sence We then had and still have of their unjust sufferings in that business, both by Our own Letters under Our sign Manuall to the States Generall of the United Provinces, and by Sir George Downing Knight and Barronet, Our Envoy Extraordinary, to whom We gave especiall command so to do, required satisfaction to be made according to the Rules of Justice, and the Amity and good correspondence, which We then desired to conserve with them firme and inviolable. And whereas after severall Addresses made to the said States Generall by Our said Envoy, and nothing granted effectuall for relief of Our said Subjects, (whom We take Ourselves in Honour and Iustice concerned to be satisfyed and repaid) We lately commanded the said Sir George Downing to intimate and signify to the said States, that We expected their finall Answer, concerning satisfaction to be made for the said Ships and Goods by a time then prefixed and since elapsed, that We might so govern ourselves thereupon that Our aforesaid Subjects might be relieved according to Right and Iustice; And yet no satisfactory Answer hath been given, so that We cannot but apprehend it to be not only a fruitles endeavour, but a prostituting of Our honour and dignity to make further Application, after so many denyals and slightings. And whereas John Exton Doctor of Laws, Iudge of Our High Admiralty Court of England upon Our Command, to certify to Us the value, and losses, and dammages, susteyned by the said William Courten and Partners, whose Interest is now vested in Our loving Subjects Sir Edmond Turnor Knight, and George Carew Esquire, and Partners, hath upon full Examination and proofs thereof made by witnesses in Our High Court of Admiralty, reported and certified under his hand that the same do amount to the summe of one hundred fifty one thousand, six hundred and twelve Pounds. 
Now Know Yee, That for a full restitution to be made to them for their Ships, Goods and Merchandizes, of which the said William Courten, and the Assignes of the said William Courten and Partners, were so dispoiled as aforesaid, with all such Costs and Charges as they shall be at for the recovery of the same, We by the Advice of our Privy Councill have thought fit, and by these presents do grant Licence and Authority under Our great Seale of England, unto Our said Subjects Sir Edmund Turnor, and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators & Assigns for and on the behalf of themselves, and other Persons interessed as aforesayed, to equippe, victuall, furnish, and to set to Sea from time to time such and so many Ships and Pinaces as they shall think fit. Provided alwayes that there be an entry made and recorded in the Admiralty Court, of the Names of all Ships and Vessels and of their Burthen and Ammonition, and for how long time they are victualled; And also of the Name of the Commander thereof before the same or any of them be set forth to Sea; And with the said Ships and Pinaces by force of Armes to set upon, take and apprehend any of the Ships, Goods, Monyes and Merchandizes of the said States Generall or any of their Subjects, inhabiting within any their Dominions or Territories whersoever, the same shall be found, and not in any Port or Harbour in England or Ireland unless it be the Ships and Goods of the Parties that did the wrong. And the said Ships, Goods, Monyes and Merchandises being so taken and brought into some Port of Our Realms and Dominions, an Inventory thereof shall be taken by Authority of Our Court of Admiralty, and Judgement shall be given in Our Court of Admiralty by the Judge or Judges thereof, for the time being, upon proofs made before him, or them, that the said Ships, Goods, Wares, Merchandises, or Money, did belong to the States Generall, or any of their Subjects as aforesaid. That they shall be lawfull prize to the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid, to retain and keep in their or any of their Possessions, and to make sale, and dispose thereof in open Markett or howsoever els to their & every of their best Advantage and Benefitt, in as ample manner as any time heretofore hath been accustomed by way of Reprisall, and to have and enjoye the same as lawfull prize, and as their own proper Goods, so that neither Captain/ Master nor any of the Company that shall serve in his owne Person, or shall promote and advance the said enterprise in manner and forme aforesaid, shall in any manner of wise be reputed or challenged for any Offendor against any of Our Laws. And that also it shall be lawfull for all manner or persons as well Our Subjects, as any other to buy the said Ships, Goods and Merchandises so taken, and apprehended by the said Captains, Masters, and others, and adjudged as aforesaid, without any dammage, loss, hinderance, trouble, molestation, or incombrance to befall the said Buyers, or any of them, in as ample and lawfull manner as if the Ships, Goods, Wares, and Merchandise had been come, and gotten by the lawfull Traffique of Merchants, or of just prises in the time of Open Warr. Provided alwayes that all Ships, Goods, and Merchandise taken by virtue of this Our Commission shall be kept in safety, and no part of them wasted, spoiled, or diminished, or the Bulke thereof broken untill Iudgement have first past as aforesaid. That they are the Ships and Merchandises of the States Generall, or some of their Subjects as aforesaid. And if by colour of this Our Commission there shall be taken any Ships, Goods, or Merchandises of any of Our loving Subjects, or the Subjects of any Prince, or State in good League, or Amity with Us (except the States Generall) or their Subjects as aforesaid, & the Goods therein laden, sold, & embezelled, or diminished, or the bulke thereof broken in any Place before they shall be adjudged to belong to the States Generall, or some of their Subjects as aforesaid, That then this Commission shall be of no sufficient Authority to take the said Ships, Goods, & Merchandises, or to warrant, or save harmles such as shall receive buy or intermedle therein, but that both the prises so taken, & the said Ship of Warr, shall be confiscated to Our use. And further We do hereby declare that it is Our will and pleasure, that this Our Commission shall remain in full force and power to all intents and purposes, untill the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors; Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, shall by vertue thereof have by force of Armes apprehended, taken, seised, recovered, and received from the said States Generall, or their Subjects, one hundred fifty one thousand six hundred and twelve pounds, according to the appraisement to be made by sufficient Appraisers upon Oath nominated and authorised in Our said Court of Admiralty, of all such Ships, Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, as shall be taken from the said States Generall, or any of their Subjects, by vertue of this Commission, or shall otherwayes receive satisfaction of the Debt aforesaid, by Composition to be made between those of the East-India Company of the Netherlands, and the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid; Notwithstanding it so happen, the present difference between Us, and the States Generall depending upon generall Reprisalls may be agreed and composed, and that in the interim a Peace and good Correspondence may be renewed between Us and the said States Generall; In which case nevertheless it's Our will and pleasure, that in the execution of this Our Commission no violence shall be done to the Persons of the said Subjects of the said States Generall, but only in case of resistance, and that after in cold bloud the Subjects of the said States Generall, if hurt or wounded shall be used with all convenient office of humanity & kindess. And further Our wil and pleasure is, that although it shall happen that all hostility between Us, & the States Generall & Our respective Subjects shall cease, yet this Our Comission shall remain, & be in full force & power, to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, by vertue thereof to apprehend, take, and seize by force & Armes, so many more of the said Ships and Goods of the States Generall, or any of their said Subjects, as besides the said summ before-mentioned shall cuntervaile, satisfy, & pay all such Costs and charges as the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, as aforesaid, shall from time to time make proof to have disbursed & paid towards the equipping, manning, paying, furnishing, & victualing of the said Ships, so licenced and Authorised as aforesaid, by this Our said Commission to be equipped, manned, paid, furnished and victualled by the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns as aforesaid for the purpose aforesaid. And our will and pleasure is, and We do hereby require Our Judge or Judges of Our High Court of Admiralty for the time being, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all other Our Iudge or Iudges, Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever to be aiding and assisting to the said Sir Edmond Turnor & George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, in all points in the due Execution of this Our Royall Commission, and to proceed to adjudication and adjudge all Ships, Merchandises, Monyes, and Goods by vertue hereof to be taken according to Our Princely intention hereby signifyed and expressed, and to take care that this Our Royall Commission be duely executed, and favourably interpreted and construed in all respects to the benefit and best advantage of the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as aforesaid. In witnesse whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents. Witness Ourself at Westminster the 19. day of May in the 17. Year of Our Reign.
 BY THE KING. ------ TO make a retrospect into all the former proceedings of this case, or to doubt the validity of the grant, after all matters were brought into a solemn Act of Letters Patents under the great Seal of England; were not only to question his Majesties Soveraign Power, and Prerogative Royall in the protection of his Subjects, but to arraign the Judgements and opinions of all the Kings Ministers of State, Judges and publique Persons; that debated this business in Councells, in Treatyes, in Parliament, and inferior Courts of Judicature, before this speciall Comission was granted. 
As the King cannot be deceived in his grant, so he cannot do his Subjects any wrong, wherefore in most Pattents the Clause (quantum in nobis) is incerted.
 It's a maxime in Law that which belongs to another Man cannot be taken from him without his own consent.
 In the Year 1639. Sir William Boswell gave a Memoriall to the States Generall in the Kings name to have satisfaction and reparation for the spoils and Dammages done in the East Indies to his Majesties Subjects. And another Memoriall was given at the same time to that purpose in England, unto Mr. Albertus Joachymy the States Ambassador then Resident in ordinary there, unto both which Answers was given, that then could not treate with the King for the Damages done to the East India Company of England, who might question them for the same herafter, so the matter rested in statu quo.
 This Pattent was not made underhand as Mr. Pergens (who had no right) made the agreement with the East India Company of the Netherlands. Neither was the Company ignorant of the precedent grants to Sir Edward Littleton and Sr. Paul Pindar before they treated with Mr. Pergens any more then they were of this Patent when they treated at Breda. Yet they had the confidence by advice of Iohn de Wit to frame their Articles rencounter to the Lawes of God and nature, impertinently using the words of mortifying, obliterating, extinguishing, and disannulling all offences, dammages, losses and injuries whatsoever sustained by the Subjects of either side, at any time whatsoever before that treaty: And that all actions, pretentions, and grants whatsoever for the same should be voyde, and for ever renounced, and revoaked, giveing every man liberty to take advantages of his owne wronge, which treaty was soone cancelled by new breaches, and his Majestie lest at liberty as if the treaty at Breda had never bin made.
 What is repugnant to reason and Justice is voyde in it selfe, as (felo de se) and distructive to all Civill Society and being. Iohn de VVit and his Brother were the first that used the words mortification and extinguishment in any Treaty of State, which God himselfe abhors in such cases, having decreed that the offendor shall restore three fould for what is wrongfully taken, which implyes the dammages sustained for want of that which was taken away from the Persons injured.
 Those, two Wits were mortified and extinguished not only for using such Arrogant expressions, but as a just reward to such Persons that indeavored to add force to violence, and fraude to oppression, and treachery to both.
 No man will deny but that the King of Great Brittain in diverse cases may suspend the Execution of Law in his own Kingdoms, but in no case can give or take away any mans right without a compensation.
 The Hollanders have a great power beyond the Cape Bon Esperance; and have lately had the boldness to affront his Majesty in his own Seas, but to strike at the Laws and Customs of England, threatnes not only his Majesties prerogative, but shakes the very foundation and common Interest of every individuall Subject, which is nearer and dearer to them then their lives and fortunes.
 IT's necessary now to shew what Presidents there are in former Treatyes, between the Belgick Provinces and the Crown of England, concerning spoyls, dammages and losses before the seaven United Provinces were a Common-wealth; and since they have been made a Republique. 
In the xxix. Article of the Treaty made between King Henry the seaventh, and Philip Duke of Austria and Burgundy concluded at London the 24. of February 1495. it was agreed that all and singular Letters of Reprisall marke and countermarke which were granted by the said Princes or their Predecessors, either out of their high Courts of Chancery or other inferior Courts should be held in suspension without further Execution to be done thereupon nisi super earum meritis habita cognitione indicta, ad hoc per ipsos Principis specialiter deputandum, alitur fuerit ordinatum. So that there was no mortification or extinguishment of the right, only a suspension of the execution, but yet if there were spetiall matter in the merits of the cause made knowne to the Princes respectively they ordered it otherwise untill satisfaction was given to the parties greeved:
 ANd if either of those Princes had had the like occasion given as his Majesty (in this case) they would have entayled a Commission to Eternity if reparation were not found, or the matter composed. 
Charles the first (of that name) King of Great Brittain, granted a speciall Commission for Reprisall, under the Great Seal of England, unto Mr. Pawlet on the behalfe of himselfe and other Marchants of London who had sustained losses by the Spanjards to the value of 30000. pounds Sterling in time of Peace; which Commission was to continue untill satisfaction of the debt and Dammages: And at the Treaty concluded betweene the King of Spaine and the King of England at Madrid in the Year 1630. Care was taken by the Spagniards to satisfie the remainder of the debt not recovered by reprize, as appeares by the accounts stated in th' Admiralty and the recorde there of inrolled in the Chancery.
 In the xxx. Article of Oliver Cromwels Treaty concluded with the States Generall in the Yeare 1654. which was made in conformity to the Treaty with the Archduke of Austria aforesaid. It was agreed that at the delivery of the Ratefication of the said Treaty foure Commissioners should be nominated on both sides to meete at London the 10. May 1654. to examine and determine all differences and injuries committed from the Year 1611. to the 18. of May 1652. as well in the East Indies, as in Greenland, Muscovia, and Brazill, or in any other place. All the said particulars of losses to be delivered in writing to the said Commissioners before the 18. of May and none after. And that what shall not be concluded within three moneths by the said Commissioners shall be referred to the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland which were to be Arbitrators and to conclude the business within six moneths following, the forme of an instrument being agreed upon for that purpose: Nevertheless there was only 80000. pound Sterling paid to th' East India Company of England for the spoyles and Dammages at Amboyna and 3650. Pounds to the widdows and Orphants of the English Factors murthered there.
 And in the xxij. Article of the Pyrenean Treaty concluded between France and Spain on the 7. of November 1659. it was agreed that all debts and Dammages contracted before the warre which upon the said day of the Publication of this Treaty shall be found not to have bin actually paid unto others by vertue of Judgements given upon Letters of confiscation or Reprisall shalbe bona fide satisfied and paid. And upon the demands and persuites that shall be about them, the said Lords and Kings shall give order unto their Officers to render as good and speedy Justice unto the Forraigners as unto their owne Subjects without any distinctions of Persons.
 By all which it appears there was no such words Mortification or extinguishment used, or others to barr any mans right of action for any things done or committed before the warre.
 In the xb. Article concluded at Whitehall between the King of Great Brittain and the States Generall on the 4. of September 1662. John de Wit and his Faction, insisted and indeavored to have all the Dammages, Spoyles, and depredations in th' East Indies mortified and extinguished to that day, Argueing that the Treaty with Oliver Cromwel and the Treaty betweene Sir George Downing and the East India Company at the Hage in the Year 1659. whereby they paid the further summe of 50000. pounds sterling for the Shipps the Pellican, the Fredrick, Francis & John taken from English Marchants since Olivers Treaty should excuse them for the Dammages they had done to Courten and his Partners Anno 1643. yet nevertheless a particular exception and provision was made in the said 15. Article, that satisfaction should be given for the Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura, according to his Majesties speciall recommendation as aforesaid, being a distinct matter from all other spoyles and depredations committed by th' East India Company of the Netherlands.
 In persuance whereof the two following Yeares being spent in fresh applications and addresses to the States Generall, the States of Holland, the Directors of th' East India Company and to severall Participants without effect.
 All Circumstances then considered there was one stepp further made in this speciall case, more then was in the Amboyna business to intayle the clayme by Letters Patents for a perpetuall Reprisall untill satisfaction and reparation should be recovered for the debt and Dammages sustained, which if it had not bin granted his Majesty had lessened his owne honor and greatnes, as well as his power and prerogative for the protection of his Subjects in their Just right, as also in assisting them in recoverie of the same.
 From whence this Conclusion naturally follows the premises, that there is no Appeale, Manifesto, Treaty Guifte, or reward whatsoever, or any other way or meanes under Heaven to mortifie, extinguish and discharge the debt and Dammages concerning the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura, but by satisfaction and reparation given to the persons interessed and injured, whereby a suffitient discharge may be had. ------ ------
 
