THE Counsellor's PLEA FOR THE DIVORCE OF Sir G. D. and Mrs. F. George Downing, Mrs. Forrester ------  By a Free Thinker ------ LONDON: Sold by R. Burleigh in Amen-Corner. May 1715. Price 6d.
 ------ ------ TO THE READER. THE following Plea is to be understood as Written by a Gentleman of the Law, very knowing in his own Profession, but more Conversant in Church-Writers than Lawyers generally are, or need to be: This made him more careful to observe what became of the Bill of Divorce, which was lately brought into the House of Lords, on the Behalf of Sir. G. D. and Mrs. F.; and he us'd such Means as to get to be present, and to hear whatever was said for or against that Bill, from the bringing it in, to the dismissing it. We who were his Friends, and knew the Calmness, and the marvellous good Temper of the Man, were much surpriz'd to find him return from Westminster, one Night, in such a fretful ill Mood, that we could hardly get a good Look from him, tho' he loved us all. At last he told us that the Bill of Divorce was thrown out; and then we found the Occasion of his Sullenness, upon which we rally'd him handsomly, and provok'd him, all we could, to tell us how things had gone: But all we could get from him, was , "Learn to Declaim, Friends, learn to Declaim; mind not Reasoning close; nor be concern'd for Consequences; get some good Words in your Mouths, and use them often; Eyes and Hands, and devout Shrugs, will do more Service than you think for." This put us so in mind of Prince Hamlet's way of Talking, in the Play, that we all of us burst into Laughing, and brought our Friend into the same Fit with us. But this Effect it had, that when he was come to himself, he was perswaded by the Company to make a Plea, upon such Topicks as he thought would have been proper for that Great Assembly, where the Cause was to be agitated: And we gave him a Fortnight to do it in, and then to bring and read it to us. This was a Way that half a Dozen of us us'd to take to perfect ourselves in Pleading. Our Friend undertook the Task, and perform'd it in the following Manner; but we never saw the Face of that excellent Man, after we parted with him; a sudden Distemper put a sudden End to his Life, and to the Hopes he had rais'd, in all that knew him, of becoming one of the eminentest Men of the Age. We found, by his foul Copy, that he had added a good deal to what is here said, and had fall'n, with some Sharpness, upon the Antient Latin ChurchWriters, tho' he had otherwise a very great and true Respect for their Works; but this he had drawn a Scratch over, and so we have left it out. Our Love to our Friend may make us somewhat Partial in his Favour, and over-value his Performance; but nothing can make us believe, that it will not be very acceptable to the Publick; nor hinder us from hoping, that from hence it will be seen, that something more was due to this Unfortunate Pair than the Common Pity. ------ ------ ------ THE CASE. I. G. D. without the Knowledge and Consent of his Father (then alive, but accounted not of sound Judgment) was, at the Age of Fifteen, by the Procurement and Persuasion of those in whose Keeping he was, Marry'd, according to the Church Form, to M. F. of the Age of Thirteen. II. This young Couple was put to Bed, in the Day time, according to Custom, and continu'd there a little while, but in the Presence of the Company, who all testify they touched not one the other; and after that, they came together no more; the young Gentleman going immediately Abroad, the young Woman continuing with her Parents. III. G. D. after Three or Four Years Travel, return'd home to England, and being sollicited to live with his lawful Wife, refus'd it, and frequently and publickly declar'd he never would compleat the Marriage. IV. Fourteen Years have pass'd since this Marriage-Ceremony was perform'd; and each party having (as is natural to think) contracted an incurable Aversion to each the other, is very desirous to be set at liberty; and accordingly Application is made to the Legislative Power, to dissolve this Marriage, and to give each Party leave, if they think fit, to Marry elsewhere. The Reasons against such Dissolution, are,
 First, That each Party was Consenting to the Marriage, and was Old enough to give such Consent, according to the known Laws of the Kingdom; the Male being Fifteen Years Old, the Female Thirteen; whereas the Years of Consent are, by Law, Fourteen and Twelve.
 Secondly, They were actually Marry'd according to the Form prescrib'd by the Church of England; the Minister pronouncing those solemn Words us'd by our Saviour, Those whom God has joyn'd let no Man put asunder. They are therefore Men and Wife both by the Laws of God and of the Land; and since nothing but Adultery can dissolve a Marriage, and no Adultery is pretended here, the Marriage continues indissoluble. ------ ------ THE PLEA. My Lords,
 I Intreat You to favour me whilst I speak a few Words to the Bill that is now brought before You, notwithstanding what I hear whisper'd about by the People that stand near me, that this is a Matter proper to the Clergy, and that we are to acquiesce in the Judgment and Opinion of my Lords the Bishops, who are agreed that such a Marriage as this is not to be dissolv'd. My Lords, the Bishops themselves are (under favour) not agreed upon this Matter, altho' the Majority of the present Ones is, as I hear, against the Dissolution of this Marriage: But were they all here and all Unanimous in the Point, would that be a binding Argument? I am a little asham'd to hear Laymen say that Cases of this Nature fall not properly under their Cognizance and Consideration, but are to be decided by the Clergy only. There are no such Difficulties in the Case before us, as I apprehend it; 'tis what we may all of us understand, and, I believe, we most of us do: And to defer and yield intirely to Authority where we are able to hear Reason and to Judge, is a Submission that is no more due, than, I dare say, it is expected by that Venerable Bench. I will therefore, with your Lordships Indulgence, speak my Mind in this Matter freely. I hear it is said, my Lords, that a Marriage that was once good and valid, is for ever after that indissoluble, unless in the Case of Adultery. I wonder, by the way, how they came to except the Case of Adultery; for tho' our blessed Saviour has excepted the Case of Adultery, yet the Stream of Authority, the Generality of those Great Men, whom we call the Fathers of the Latin Church, together with the Rabble of School-men and Commentators, have almost all to a Man, deny'd the Innocent Party the liberty of Marrying again, altho' divorc'd from an Adulterous Partner; and I would fain know how much a Divorce is worth, above Six-pence, without leave to Marry again, if the injur'd Party pleases? But I only mention this, to let your Lordships see, whither the Reverence of Authority alone, and Great Names, may carry those who will be led tamely by them, and will not use the Reason and good Sense which God has given them.
 I ask your Lordships Pardon for this Digression, and come to the Point. A Marriage, we are told, is good, where the Parties concern'd were at Age and liberty to Consent, and actually Consented, and were actually Marry'd by the Form prescrib'd in the Book of Common-Prayer. And such a Marriage, we are also told, is indissoluble by the Law of God. I will not waste the least of your Lordships Time in needless Cavils, but take it for granted, that the Man now concern'd was Fifteen Years of Age, and the Woman Thirteen, which are Years of Consent by the Laws of the Land: And that they were actually Marry'd by the prescrib'd Form. But I deny that the Marriage is therefore indissoluble by the Legislative Power of the Land, and that for many Reasons.
 My Lords, The Years of Consent are not fix'd to Fourteen or Twelve either by Nature, Reason, or any Law of God; but purely and meerly by the positive Laws of the Land, which may change them to Morrow; and if they were chang'd to Day, no Man in England would, I dare affirm it, be dissatisfy'd; it seems so senseless and unreasonable to give our Children the Power of disposing of their Persons for ever, at an Age when we will not let them dispose of Five Shillings, without Direction and Advice. But I insist not upon that at present, the Law is already made, and I consider it as such; but still it is but a Human Law, and the same Power which determines it to bind in the general, may, if it seem fitting, determine it not to bind in this or any such particular Case; and that without Offence either to God or Man. The Laws indeed must fix upon a certain Time, or otherwise the Subject will want Direction, and a Rule to go by. And let us take it for granted now, that the Time fix'd by the Laws is a reasonable and fitting Time for 99 People in a Hundred; yet if the Hundredth Person be aggrieved to Death, or worse than Death, by such a Law, what is the Impediment, what the Danger, what the Mischief, of declaring the Hundredth Person not to be bound by that Law? If it were possible for Human Wisdom to foresee all the Inconveniences and Mischiefs that can arise, would not the Legislative Power provide a Remedy for all? Would it not make its Rules as comprehensive as it could, so that they might comprize and take in all Cases and Persons possible? But this we find was never done, nor ever will be done: No Foresight is sufficient for all Accidents. But there is Room for After-thought; and a Power to Cure the Evils which it could not prevent, because it could not foresee, is lodged in every Government. 'Tis to that Power we have now recourse: We pray Relief against a Law, which however just and fitting it may be thought in itself, and beneficial to Others, binds Us to nothing but Misery; and truly kills, according to the Letter. The Man and Woman were at Age, according to the Law, but wanted that Maturity and Forwardness of Age, which the Law supposes and requires in People of Twelve and Fourteen, when it makes them capable of Marrying at those Years. They gave Consent indeed with their Tongues, and pronounc'd the solemn Words, by which they mutually deliver'd up themselves each to the other, that is, they did as they were bid to do, and said just as the Parents and Priest commanded them to say. But where was the Consent of Heart? Where was the Knowledge and Understanding that is requisite to the forming a Resolution of this nature, and to the making such a solemn Contract? My Lords, the Children were entirely passive in the Matter, and very obedient to the Orders of those that govern'd them; and would have given away their Fortunes and their Liberties, and every thing they had, had they been bid to do so, in the same manner. I may affirm, because I have taken great Pains to be inform'd of the Truth, that this young Couple came together to Contract, and to Consent to Marriage, without so much as the Desire or Appetite of being Marry'd; without so much as knowing what it was they were to Bargain and Contract for: They consented to give the Use and the Dominion of their Bodies each to the other, as long as they both should live, without so much as understanding what they meant when they said so; without so much as an Ability of making good their Promises and Engagements.
 This, my Lords, is the Consent this Couple of young and thoughtless Creatures gave; and this Consent the Church, it seems, insists upon. The solemn Promise was pronounc'd in solemn manner by the Priest, and the Children were bid to say after him, and said after him, and then the Knot was ty'd, that nothing can loose but Death. Is there any thing in the World so like a Charm as this? My Lords, there is not any Contract in the World but may be utterly dissolv'd, by the free Consent of Parties, if without Prejudice to any Third. I like a Horse that is in any Man's Possession, and he likes the Price I offer for it; we thereupon agree, and pass our Words each to the other: His Promise then gives me a Right to the Horse, and my Promise gives him a Right to the Price agreed upon. But in a little time we each of us bethink ourselves, and each dislikes the Bargain he has made, and each agrees to set the other at his liberty: I have not us'd your Horse, nor have you gotten my Money. Here the Contract is utterly dissolv'd by the Consent of Parties, and no third Man is hurt thereby. Will any Man say that we have done amiss? Will any one say that we have so much as broken our Word each to the other? The Word I gave to him was to secure his Bargain; the Word he gave to me was to secure me mine. If he dislikes the Bargain, he gives me (as it were) my Word again; and so do I to him; and then we are again at liberty. My Lords, If we should carry the Matter farther yet, and to secure the Bargain we seem at first so fond of, should give our Oath to each the other, in Presence of a great Company, and with what Solemnity besides you will, yet I affirm, (and so do all the Casuists in the World, as I am told by those who know) I say, my Lords, that I affirm, that if in this Case, after this solemn Oath, we should both of us freely consent to break this Agreement off, and no Body else be hurt thereby, we should neither of us be guilty of Perjury, or Breach of Oath. Our Oaths were given to each the other, to secure the Promises that were made; and if we, each of us, see reason to consent, and freely do consent, to release each other of his Promise, the Oath can lay no farther Obligation on us. I promised, and I swore I would perform that Promise to him; he did the same to me; but neither of us, after some time, car'd, or requir'd, to have such Promise made good to him; our Oaths must therefore follow the Nature of our Promises; and when the Promise is releas'd, the Oath is so also. It may be we both of us did amiss in calling God to Witness (as in an Oath Men are presum'd to do) in an Affair of so light Moment; I will not dispute that now, but I maintain that such an Oath obliges not, if the Promise, for whose Security the Oath was given, be mutually releas'd, and no Body hurt thereby. My Lords, I appeal to those who understand these Matters whether what I say be not true.
 Whence is it then, that the Marriage-Contract should be indissoluble, when all other Contracts, tho' confirm'd with solemn Oaths, may be dissolv'd, if the contracting Persons agree to such a Dissolution, and no Third Person suffers by it? How comes a Promise of this Nature to differ from all other Promises whatever? Oh, say the Popish Casuists, it is because this same Matrimony is a great Sacrament. No, say the Protestant Divines with us, it is no Sacrament, but it is the Ordinance of God, instituted in Paradice, in the Time of Man's Innocence and signifies to us the mystical Union that is betwixt Christ and his Church; and the Promise is made with all Solemnity, in the Presence of God, in the Church, before the Priest and all the Company, and confirm'd with the Words of Christ: And therefore a Consent and Promise made in such a solemn manner can never be retracted or dissolv'd.
 My Lords, I intend not to say one Word against the Dignity of Marriage. But I do not think that the Solemnity of Words, of Place, and Company, in which a Contract is made, adds any Strength or Virtue to such Contract, or makes it more Obliging.
 A Man indeed will certainly be more asham'd to break a Promise made at Church, and before a great Company, than he will be to break such a Promise made to his Friend alone, at his own House. But is he more oblig'd in Conscience to keep his publick Promise than his private one? Will any honest Man say that? The Obligation therefore does not arise from the Solemnity of Words and Place, and Company, but from the free and voluntary Promise which a Man makes, and the Right he thereby gives to another. The Scandal also and Offence that is given and taken by a Breach of Promise, made in solemn manner, is indeed greater, than is occasion'd by the Breach of a Promise made in private: But the reason of that is, because more People know of it; for if the same People were assur'd that such a Promise was indeed made, altho' in private, they would as certainly condemn the Breach of it, as they would, had it been made before them all; and they would be as much scandaliz'd at such a Breach, as if they had been Witnesses to the making the Promise: Which is a Proof that a Man's Obligation to keep his Promise arises from his having freely made it, and not from his having made it in such a Place, and before such a Company, and in such a particular Form of Words.
 The first Marriage that ever was made, was made without any Words at all, that we know of, expressing their Consent; and it was so Clandestine, that there was not so much as a mortal Man by, no not a Priest to joyn them together: But God who made them, brought the Woman to the Man, and instructed them by Reason and natural Principles, that they were made each for the other. There was Consent of Heart, and Union of Affections. But I insist not upon the Example; it is too singular to be a Rule. Years of Age are necessary; and Consent, in express Words, mutually given and taken, is necessary to make a Marriage-Contract good and valid.
 This is the Ordinance of God, this is of divine Appointment, that one Man and one Woman should freely and knowingly give Consent to be each others, to all the Ends and Purposes of Matrimony, as long as they both should live, and should not be allow'd to give themselves to any ones Use besides.
 And all that Christ added (if indeed he added any thing, or did any more than revive it) to this original Institution was, That when either of the Parties brake their Contract by Adultery, the innocent Party was at liberty to seperate from the faulty One, and Marry another, if it were thought fitting. Since therefore all that is absolutely necessary to the making a MarriageContract, is, that a Male and Female, who are at Age, and liberty to Consent, should actually Consent to give the Use and Dominion each of their Bodies, to the other; and, exclusive of all others, to live together faithfully till Death parted them: Since this is so, I do affirm, that Caius and Caia, two Heathens, giving their Consent, in the Manner abovemention'd, in their Father's Parlour, are Man and Wife according to God's Ordinance; their Marriage is as true, as good, and as innocent a Marriage, in the Sight of God, as the Marriage of a Jew and Jewess, tho' both in Covenant with God, made before the High-Priest himself, with all the Ceremonies you can imagine, and in what Form of Words you will, before a hundred Witnesses, and at the Altar in the Temple of Jerusalem.
 I am, my Lords, so satisfy'd of the Truth of what I say, that I go on to say, with all Assurance, that the Marriage-Contract of this Caius and Caia was as good, as binding, and as innocent as the Marriage-Contract of any Lord in this Assembly, tho' Solemniz'd in the Church of St. Paul's, according to the establish'd Form in the Common-Prayer, by his Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury himself, repeating those most sacred Words of Christ, Those whom God has joyn'd, let no Man put asunder. And I averr, That God did as surely joyn Caius and Caia, when they Consented to become Husband and Wife for Life, as he has joyn'd any Couple else for these Seventeen hundred and fifteen Years. So that I hope, my Lords, you will not suffer your Eyes to be dazl'd with the Pomp and Glitter of great Words, and awful Sounds, which fly before good Sense, and vanish when you come to look into the Reason of Things.
 Caius and Caia must express their Consent in Words and Signs appointed by the Laws of their Country; and must be Married by the Persons set apart for such Service, according to the Rites and Ceremonies of their Religion: So must the Jewish Pair, according to theirs; and so must Christians also. But there is something common to them all; and that in which they all unite must needs be that which makes the MarriageContract valid and obliging. And what is that, but that a Male and Female should be at Age to Consent, and at Liberty to Consent, and should actually Consent, to give to each the other the Use and Dominion of each others Body, exclusively to all the World besides, as long as they both shall live?
 This is properly the Marriage-Contract, and common to all Nations and Religions; and all beyond this, is Matter of Ceremony, Decency and Prudence; and order'd by the Legislative Powers of different Countries, as they see convenient. And I do not so much as pretend to dispute the Force and Obligation of these Laws, to such as are subject to these different Powers: They are, and may, and must be binding as to the Dowries of the Wives, and the Legitimation of Children, and their inheriting Estates and Honours, and in all such like Cases.
 My Lords, so much has been said in favour of the Solemnity of Words, of Place, and Persons, which are, in truth, but Circumstances to a Marriage-Contract, that it has made me spend so much of your time, to try to lay aside that Prejudice, and to consider the present Contract in itself. We were not of Age sufficient for Consent, altho' we were of Age according to the Letter of the Law. We gave our Consent to be Marry'd, but it was not the Consent of Understanding, for we knew not what it was that Marriage meant. We repeated very solemn Words, after the Priest, as we were bidden; but it was but the Labour of the Lips, the Heart did not, the Heart indeed could not go along with them: For whether we take the Heart for Knowledge, or Desire, there was no Heart concern'd in all this Matter: We neither of us knew the Nature of the Contract we were making; we neither of us had so much as the Desire of doing what that Contract both supposes and requires. And now, my Lords, we humbly hope you will not let us be at Age, only to do ourselves irreparable Mischief; nor call that a Consent, which is to compleat our Ruine, and which can serve no other End.
 We do not deny ourselves to have been at legal Age; we do not deny that we have given a verbal Consent; but we deny ourselves to have been at Years of Understanding, to give such a Consent as is reasonable and fitting in a Matter of such Importance. And we appeal to your Lordships Equity, whether this Age and this Consent shall stand good to our Undoing, and to the Advantage of no Creature in the World besides: For who, my Lords, will be the worse for setting us at Liberty, or who will be the better for our being Bound? I am exceedingly sensible, that I have trespass'd much upon your Lordships Patience, but I am bound in Justice and in Conscience to beg a little more of it, to speak a Word or two to the last Part of the Objection, That since the Parties before you, in Petition, are Man and Wife both by the Laws of God and of the Land; and since by the Laws of God nothing but Adultery can dissolve a Marriage, and no Adultery is pretended here, the Marriage of Consequence continues indissoluble.
 To save your Lordships Time, I will grant every thing that can be granted; I grant, that by the Laws of God, nothing can dissolve a compleat Marriage but Adultery; and I grant, that no Adultery is pretended in the Case; but I deny that this Marriage before you, is therefore indissoluble, because I must and do deny the Marriage before you to be a compleat Marriage, by the Laws of God: And, I hope, with your Lordships Favour and Indulgence, to shew it is not a compleat Marriage, because it never was consummated.
 The Love and the Desire that Men and Women have each of the other, is what is implanted in the Hearts of all of them, by God himself who made them; and is therefore as innocent an Appetite as any else they have; and it has (as every other Appetite) its proper Satisfaction provided for it by the good Creator: And when it fixes on its proper Object, is satisfy'd as innocently, as the Desire of Meat, or Drink, or Sleep can be. Marriage, my Lords, is fixing the Desire upon its proper Object: And this Desire is never to be satisfy'd with Innocence, but in the Marriage-Bed. The End of Marriage therefore is the Satisfaction of this Appetite. This is the End and Purpose of God in making them Male and Female; this is the Way, the only Way, of their becoming one Flesh: And therefore till the End is answer'd, where it can be answer'd, Marriage is not perfect and compleat. God cannot properly be said to have joyn'd those together, who never joyn'd themselves together, in the natural Way, of his Appointment: And therefore, under favour, 'tis a great Misapplication of those sacred Words, to the Case before us, where the two Parties never came together, in the Sense intended by those Words.
 What can be plainer than this Proposition?
 The End of Marriage, by God's Institution, is, that two should become one Flesh.
 The Two before you in the Bill were never yet One Flesh. Your Lordships will make this Conclusion, Those whom God has joyn'd let no Man put asunder.
 The Two before you in the Bill were never yet conjoyn'd by God, in the true Meaning of those Words; they may therefore as yet be put asunder by Men; as I hope they will by your Lordships.
 My Lords, the Easiness of granting a Divorce in Cases of Impotence is a good Proof that Marriage is not compleat and perfect where the Ends of it are not to be obtain'd; nay, 'tis a Proof that it was no Marriage, but a Nullity from the beginning, altho' the Parties were at full Age, altho' they gave a free Consent, and were Marry'd with all Formalities; altho' the Priest pronounc'd them Man and Wife in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and said those sacred Words over their Heads, Those whom God has joyn'd let no Man put asunder, they were not Man and Wife, because they could not become one Flesh: They were not joyn'd by God, because they could not joyn themselves together. Your Lordships will consider therefore whether a Marriage not consummated (nor ever like to be consummated) be a compleat Marriage in God's Sight; so compleat, I mean, as to be indissoluble. I shall be told, I know, that in the Case before us, there is now no defect of Power, no Impotence or Inability to compleat the Marriage pretended, but want of Will.
 I own it, and I only use the Instance to shew that a Marriage not consummated, is not indissoluble by the Laws of God; and that an utter Aversion to the Consummation of Marriage, in both Parties, is as good a Reason for a Divorce, as an Inability in one Party, which never fails of procuring a Divorce. In the one Case, the Parties are each of them untouch'd, pure and unsully'd even in Thought; whilst in the other, there must pass such Things, as I have neither Will nor Leave to mention; and yet a Divorce follows of course. My Lords, if ever we had come together in this manner, I had not had one Word to reply on this Occasion; all I have said of our want of Age would have signify'd nothing; all I have said of our giving no Consent had been said to no purpose; had Consummation follow'd any time within these fourteen Years, we must not have appear'd in this Place. But when, to our want of Age, and want of Knowledge to consent to Marriage, we can also add, that we have never come together to compleat this Marriage, and that we are as pure from each the other, as we were when born, we humbly hope your Lordships will deliver us from the Chains which the Laws of our Country only have bound us with.
 'Tis said, my Lords, that Consummation is not necessary to compleat a Marriage, because a Man is Master of the Woman's Fortune, and the Woman has right to her Dowry, altho' the Man or Woman should chance to die before the Nuptial-Bed were made ready. My Lords, I grant, that when the Parties who were at Age, and Liberty, have given their Consent, and the Priest has done his Work, according to the Form prescrib'd, the Law is satisfy'd, and looks no farther; and gives each Party a Right to all the Advantages agreed upon, tho' Consummation follow not: The Laws suppose that what is reasonable and fitting will follow, and only secures legal Advantages that are contracted for. The other is a Point of Duty and of Conscience. I only ask whether there be a Man or Woman in the World, who thinks that the End of Marriage, as it is God's Ordinance, is fully answer'd, 'till it be consummated? My Lords, we come not here to say that a Marriage is not a legal Marriage 'till Consummation; nor to assign a Day, or a Week, or a Month, for such Completion: We presume not to trifle in that manner in such an Assembly as this. We only mean to say, that a Marriage not consummated, nor ever like to be consummated, is dissoluble, without Offence to any Law of God; and that a Marriage of that kind is not a compleat Marriage in his Sight; the full Purpose of his Institution is not answer'd 'till they become one Flesh. All that goes before is previously necessary to the making such Conjunction innocent, but it is not what is mainly and principally intended by Him who made them Male and Female. And therefore 'tis but an Impertinence to tell us that Adam and Eve were compleatly Marry'd before they went into the Bridal Bower: 'Tis so with every honest Couple, as well as with our first Parents: But would they have been compleatly Marry'd had they never gone into that Bridal Bower at all, and liv'd for many Years? What Marriage, I pray, would that have been? They might have been good Company and good Friends, but they could no more have been said to be Man and Wife, with respect to what God intended by Marriage, than two Men, or two Women, living together in Unity and Amity, may be said to be Marry'd together. I believe it would puzzle the Doctors to prove that Adam and Eve were ever Marry'd at all, any otherwise than by a mutual Consent to go together; for there was no Consent of any Superiour to ask or obtain; and there could be no need of promising to be faithful to each other, for there was no Body else to go to. I wonder such an Instance should be pitch'd upon.
 But now, my Lords, I come to the great Argument of all which is brought to prove a Marriage compleat, tho' its Effect never follow; and that is, that Joseph and the Blessed Virgin were, and are often call'd, in the Holy Scripture, Man and Wife, altho' we are sure by Scriptures they never came together till the Holy Child was born; and, by Tradition, sure they never came together after it was born.
 This Example I take to be the Ground and Bottom of all those absurd Doctrines and Propositions that are rais'd, in maintaining a Marriage to be compleat by the Consent of Parties, and the Benediction of the Priest, without any other fruit or effect. Joseph and the Blessed Virgin were certainly Espous'd and Betroath'd each to the other; and he thereby became so much her Husband, that he thought of putting her away, which shews he thought she was his Wife: And he is call'd her Husband by the Evangelist Saint Matthew; and she herself calls Joseph the Father of her Son, Thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing: And a little before they are call'd his Parents. There is not a Word of all this that I either do, or dare deny. Be pleas'd, my Lords, but to remember and observe, that the same Scriptures that call Joseph the Husband of the Blessed Virgin, do also call Joseph the Father of her Son; and the same Scriptures that call Joseph and Mary Husband and Wife, do also call Joseph and Mary the Parents of Jesus. And he was in truth as much the Husband of the Virgin as he was the Father of her Son; and much in the same Sense, and to the same Purpose. My Lords, I have taken some Pains to understand this Matter, and what I am going to say I have from very good Authority, living as well as dead, for it is something out of the way of my Profession. It was absolutely necessary, by God's Appointment, that the Saviour of the World should be born of a Woman: And it was, by the same Appointment, full as necessary that he should not be the Son of Man, in the common Way. To reconcile these Difficulties therefore, he was Conceiv'd by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary. But because this Saviour of the World was to be, in especial manner, the Messiah of the Jews, he was to be born a Jew; to descend from Abraham, according to the Promise, of the Tribe of Juda, of the House and Lineage of David. This Messiah of the Jews expected should be born as other Men were born; and they would never have receiv'd him as such, or heard him as a Prophet and Teacher sent from God, unless they had believ'd him to be born in lawful Wedlock; as they certainly did, or else you would have heard of it over and over in the Gospels, which conceal none of the Slanders, Contumelies and Reproaches, which the Jews, upon all Occasions, did so plentifully pour upon our Saviour. Had the Blessed Mary not been Marry'd, what would the People have said of her? What would they not have said of her and of her Son? It was therefore absolutely necessary to the Jews receiving Christ for the Messiah, and hearkning to him, that he should be born under the Reputation of Marriage; which could not be unless she took a Husband in the usual manner. You see what Entertainment both his Person and Doctrine found, altho' he was suppos'd to be born in Wedlock, and of honest Parents, only because of their mean and low Condition; but what had been his Fortune, had they thought him Spurious?
 I am almost sorry I have occasion to speak of these Matters; and I restrain myself from going on, in hopes that enough is said to shew, that the Marriage of Joseph with the Blessed Virgin was all (as I am told the antient Christian Writers call it) according to Oeconomy. It was to save Appearances; to cover both the Mother and the Son from the Reproaches of ignorant malicious People, till it should please God, in his own good time, to manifest the Truth more clearly to the World; and therefore tho' it might be wrapp'd in Prophecies before his Birth, yet it was not till after his Death that it became an Article of Faith, that he was Conceiv'd by he Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary. During the Life of Christ, Joseph was the suppos'd Husband of the blessed Virgin, and the suppos'd Father of her blessed Son; and, under the Cover of that Relation, was to take upon him, under God, the Care and Protection of them both.
 Will any Man, after this, pretend to say that this was a compleat Marriage, as Marriage is the Ordinance of God? It was compleat to all the Ends and Purposes that God intended by it: It screen'd the Mother and the Son from Blame and Slander; and it provided for them such Defence and Maintenance as was convenient. But what is this to God's Original Institution? Or how can such a thing be drawn into Example? Joseph and Mary are said to be marry'd, altho' they never did compleat that Marriage, altho' they never must compleat it, therefore a MarriageContract is a Compleat Marriage in any One else as well as them, altho' they proceed no farther! That is, (I humbly pray your Lordships to observe) there was a Marriage Contract made, about some 1715 Years ago, betwixt a holy Man and the most excellent and holy Maid that ever liv'd upon the Earth; plac'd in such Circumstances as never happen'd before, nor ever will happen again; upon an extraordinary and most astonishing Occasion: The Contract was, that this Man should be call'd the Husband of this Virgin, for Reasons that never happen'd before, nor ever will happen again; and this Couple, by God's Appointment, never were to touch each other, in the matrimonial Way, till the Birth of a Child, that was to be call'd (because He truly was) the Son of God. Now this most rare, most singular, most unexampl'd Instance, is brought to convince your Lordships, that a bare Marriage-Contract makes a Compleat Marriage, according to the Laws of God, without proceeding any farther, in every other Couple that is Marry'd: And the Parties for whom I now appear are said to be compleatly Marry'd, altho' they never came together, because the blessed Virgin and Joseph were compleatly Marry'd, altho' they went no farther than a Marriage-Contract, nor ever could go farther, by God's Appointment. My Lords, if such an Example as this can operate so extensively and strangely, we must give over making Consequences in the way of Reason, and attend to the Dictates of our Spiritual Masters, without examining what it is they say. I do not know what Form of Words the Jews made use of when they were Marry'd; but I know, methinks, that the Form prescrib'd by the Church of England would have been very odd, improper, and absurd, to have been us'd to that blessed Couple, when it describes the Ends of Matrimony to be, First, For the Procreation of Children; Secondly, For a Remedy against Sin; and, Thirdly, For mutual Society, Help and Comfort, that the one ought to have of the other. The Sum of all is this, that the Ends of this particular Marriage, which God intended, were fully answer'd, by a Marriage-Contract only; but the Ends of Marriage in general, as it is God's Ordinance, neither were, nor might be answer'd by such Contract only; and therefore 'tis an absurd unreasonable thing to argue from the Compleatness of the one, to the Compleatness of any other, that may proceed farther, and that ought to proceed farther, and is certainly not compleat till it does proceed farther.
 Another Argument to prove a Marriage to be compleat, by a Marriage-Contract only, without proceeding to Consummation, is fetch'd from the Law of Moses, Deut. xxii.23. where a Woman, betroath'd or espous'd to a Man, is to be Stoned to Death, as an Adulteress, if she admit another to her Bed; which shews that the Validity of Marriage proceeds from the mutual Covenant and Consent that two have given to be each others. 
 My Lords, I yield to every Word of this, and to whatever else can be said of the same kind. A Marriage-Contract does certainly give a Right to every thing contracted for. As soon as we are Marry'd I have a Right to her Person, a Right to her Fortune, a Right to her Reputation; and if any one injure her in any of those Particulars, I have a Right to her Vindication; for she is really mine, and I am hers: And I own I am as much Marry'd to her the first Morning, and she to me, as I shall be the Morning or Week after, as to all the Ends and Purposes which Human Laws can propose or take any Cognizance of. And if she Abuses any one the Hour after she is Marry'd, 'tis I must answer for it. If she gives away any of her Goods, which are now become mine, why no Body can receive them; I shall recover them, for they are mine. And if she give away herself, (tho' I have never yet come near her) she is certainly an Adulteress; she has given away what was mine, and broken her Faith and Contract, and is liable to whatever Penalty the Laws of the Country think fit to inflict upon such Offenders. I could moreover answer this Law of Moses by another Law of the same Moses, which sets a Man at liberty from a Maid he was betroath'd to, if she please him not when the Time of Marriage comes. 'Tis in Exod. xxi.8. And the only Difference is, that the Maid betroath'd in Exodus was not free, but a Servant; the Maid betroath'd in Deuteronomy was a free Woman. But tho' this makes a great Difference in the Laws and Customs of a Country, yet certainly 'tis none in Point of Conscience: The Obligation there is alike to Bond as Free, if other Circumstances make no difference. But the answering one Objection with another clears up nothing. I own that the Validity of Marriage proceeds from the mutual Covenant. But pray what is this mutual Covenant? Is it not the Consenting and Agreeing of a Man and Woman to give to each other the Use and Dominion of their Bodies, exclusive of all the World besides, as long as they both shall live? What is it that the Parties Contract for? What is it People Consent to upon these Occasions? I know it is said by Father Ambrose, Connubium non facit Defloratio Virginitatis, sed Pactio Conjugalis. And it was said before him long by Father Ulpian, Nuptias non Concubitus sed Consensus facit. And certainly every Body will say after them, that the Agreement of a Man and Woman to lie together, does not make a Marriage. But will St. Ambrose tell us, that a Pactio Conjugalis (a Marriage Covenant) can be fully answer'd without Concumbency, if the Parties live and are not hindred? In truth I will not answer for the Father, who (as the rest of them) had Joseph and Mary always in his Eye: But I will answer for the Civil Lawyer, who, I am sure, would never say a Marriage was compleat that was not, if it could have been, Consummated. Hear what Modestinus says, Nuptiae sunt Conjunctio Maris & Faeminae, & consortium omnis vitae. 'Tis true he was a Heathen Lawyer, but had he also added, that Marriage was ordain'd to be a Remedy against Sin, he had talk'd the Language of our Common-Prayer-Book. For he says it is for the Procreation of Children, (Conjunctio Maris & faeminae) and for mutual Society, Help and Comfort, that the one ought to have of the other, and taking each other for better for worse, which is but the English of Consortium omnis vitae. Paulus, another Civilian, says, that Nuptiae consistere non possunt nisi Consentiant omnes, i.e. Qui coeunt, Quorumq; in potestate sunt. There is no such thing as a right Marriage, where there is not the Consent of all Parties, i.e. the Consent of the two qui coeunt, and the Consent of Parents or Guardians in whose Power and Disposal the young Ones were. All Writers in the World agree, that Consent, Covenant, Contract, (call it what you will) is so necessary to a Marriage, that it cannot be valid without it; but then they also say, that such a Consent is a Consent to answer the Ends of Marriage; that such a Covenant is a Covenant to live together, according to God's Ordinance; and that such a Contract is a Contract for the Use and Dominion of each others Body; which is, in effect, neither more nor less than what St. Paul has said in 1 Cor. vii.3 and 4, which I repeat not, because it is so well known. But they who think a Marriage is a compleat and perfect Marriage, according to God's Ordinance, (for as to Human positive Laws, I contest it not) altho' it never be Consummated; they I desire may read that Passage, and consider it. My Lords, there is another slight Objection which I will but just mention, and that is, That the Church allows the Oldest People that are to be Marry'd, and accounts their Marriage good, altho' there is neither hope nor likelihood of having Children; and accordingly appoints the Prayer for that Purpose to be omitted and left out; and therefore a Marriage is compleat by Contract only, without any Consummation.
 The Argument, I think, is this, That because a Marriage is a good Marriage which is not Consummated, because it cannot be by reason of People's Age, therefore a Marriage is a good Marriage, tho' not Consummated, which yet may be Consummated any Day in the Year. If this be a right Inference, there is no making a wrong one, for one can never make a worse. My Lords, the Church neither does nor can pretend to determine when People are too Old to Marry: It meddles with no such Matters, but leaves every one to their Discretion. She seems to assign three Ends of Marriage, which I have had occasion to mention before; and if the first cannot be answer'd, the second may, and so may the third, tho' the other two should not.
 And now, my Lords, I hope I have shewn that the Bill before you is a good Bill; that the Divorce we sue for is very reasonable and just; and that such a Marriage as ours, made at such an Age, with such a Consent as is indeed no Consent, and never Consummated, tho' Fourteen Years since, is such a Marriage as may very innocently be dissolv'd, without any manner of Offence to the Laws of God. And I desire any Man to assign any one Law of God that would be hurt hereby, unless we are made to believe that every Law of the Church, is also a Law of God; which when I hear affirm'd, I shall not want an Answer to it. But I am sure the Laws of God, which are properly so call'd, are to be found in a Holy Book, where nothing appears against us. For as for those Passages which allow a Man to put away his Wife for no cause but that of Adultery, 'tis certain, to a Demonstration, that they refer to Marriages that have been Compleated and Consummated by Man and Wife. And if your Lordships would indulge me so far, I would venture to say, that no Man of common Sense, can read those Passages, and think otherwise. My Lords, he must be a Scholar that can read that Question of the Parisee's, and the Determination of our Blessed Saviour, about Divorces, and conclude after all, that the Marriages there spoken of, might be such Marriages as never were Consummated, as well as such as were. 'Tis impossible to mistake so plain a Case, without a good deal of Learning and Study. My Lords, it stirs me to a little Indignation, and gives me a Concern, somewhat beyond my Fee, to hear this Marriage-Contract of ours treated like a Marriage of Fourteen Years standing, where Man and Wife have all along cohabited, and now are weary of each other, and the common Bed, and seeking to your Lordships for leave to look for more agreeable Companions. Why else are all these Places of Scripture brought against our Bill, when not a single Line of them is pertinent and proper to our Case? If they had brought the Scriptures to prove, that a Boy of Fifteen, and a Girl of Thirteen, not born in Paradise, or in the Gardens of the East, but in a cold and frozen Climate of the North, were of Age sufficient to dispose of their Persons for ever, they had done something to the Purpose, for that, my Lords, was our Age. If they had brought the Scriptures to prove, that a Boy and Girl, of the Years aforesaid, repeating a certain Form of Words, after a certain Person, in a Church, between the Hours of Eight and Twelve, had thereby made a Contract that must stand like Fate, and be irrevocable as the Hours that pass'd a Week ago, by any Power on Earth, they had done something to the Purpose, for that indeed we did. I have already own'd, we said what we were bid to say; we did what we were bid to do: We should have done a great deal more, and said a great deal more, had we been order'd so: 'Tis not our Fault that we did not give it under our Hands, that our Marriage was Consummated by the Words we repeated in the Church; had we been ask'd to do so, we had surely done it, such was our Innocence, such was our Ignorance! This, my Lords, had been the Point they should have labour'd most to clear; for this they should have brought their Scripture-Proofs, to shew that the Words of a Marriage-Contract, are, by God's Appointment, as soon as ever they are utter'd, of so binding a Nature, that neither the Consent of Parties, nor all the Powers that are on Earth, can make them null and void: That it is proper and peculiar to this Contract never to be dissolv'd, tho' nothing but Words has pass'd. All other Promises, I must say again, all other Covenants, all other Oaths, are own'd to be dissoluble, by the Consent of Parties, where no Injury is done to any Third. The MarriageWords, it seems, are the only Words in the World that operate like a Charm, and take effect, in spite of all the Reason, and all the new Necessities, that can arise and be urg'd against it; altho' the Parties should not have so much as touch'd each others Lips, nor ever shall. Here Scriptures would have done exceedingly well, and have obtain'd the Reverence and Obedience that is due to their Authority, had they but shewn that a verbal Contract, made with Solemnity, answers all the Ends and Purposes of Matrimony, as it is God's Ordinance; that it is not only previously necessary, both by the Laws of God and Man, to make the Conjunction of Man and Woman innocent, but the verbal Contract is the thing itself, 'tis Matrimony to all Intents and Purposes; and is no more to be dissolv'd, than it had been had the Fruit and Effect of it been half a Dozen Children now presented at your Lordships Bar. There is no End of the Absurdities that arise from treating a Verbal Contract, that has only pass'd the Lips, just as you would a Marriage Consummated, and perfectly Compleat; and therefore, tho' I call for their ScriptureProofs, yet I am well assur'd none can be brought to prove a Point so unreasonable. But to hear them heap up Scripture upon Scripture, to prove, that a Marriage is God's Ordinance; that Marriages are sacred Contracts; that by the Laws of Christ they cannot be dissolv'd but for the Cause of Fornication, is, in my humble Opinion, to hear them say nothing to the Purpose, unless those Scriptures mean that Marriage not Consummated is God's Ordinance; that Marriage-Contracts are sacred, altho' the very End and Meaning of the Contract is not answer'd; and that Marriages which Christ there speaks of as indissoluble (except for the sake of Adultery) are such Marriages as never were Consummated. In short, if because the Word Marriage is a Word that is common to a Marriage before it is Consummated, and also after, therefore what is applicable to a Consummated Marriage, is also applicable to a Marriage not Consummated; if this be a Consequence, a reasonable Man will be asham'd hereafter of making Consequences. We may as well conclude that, because Caius is a Man, and Titius is a Man, therefore Caius and Titius are one and the same Man. They tell us also, from the Scriptures, that Matrimony signifies to us, the mystical Union there is betwixt Christ and his Church; but let them say it, if they think fit, that Matrimony not Consummated does, or can signify this Union: But in this I spare them, and indeed myself, not daring to speak with any Freedom on this Subject; and finding I have already transgress'd too far, I humbly desire your Lordships to consider, whether there ever was so equitable a Cause of Divorce within the Walls of this House. It is so singular a Case, that it cuts of all your Fears of its becoming an Example; the oldest Lawyer living never heard the like in all respects; nor will the Youngest ever live to see it made a Precedent: But were there Twenty such like Cases now before you, they are so reasonable and just, that they would every one deserve to be reliev'd by your Lordships; and 'tis below the Dignity of the Legislative Power to be afraid of making Precedents, where there is Reason, and Justice, and Compassion on their Side: To all which we lay as strong a Claim, as ever Parties did that ever were before this House.------ FINIS.  
