AN ARGUMENT OF A Learned JUDGE IN THE EXCHEQUER-CHAMBER UPON A Writ of Error Out of the KING'S-BENCH, In a CAUSE, Wherein Sir Samuel Barnadiston was Plaintiff against Sir William Soame, Sheriff of the County of Suffolk, Defendant, Wherein the Privilege of the House of Commons, in Determining Matters relating to the Right of Elections of their own Members, is justified. Necessary for all Persons that have any thing to do with ELECTIONS. ------ From the Original MS. ------ London: Printed for Geo. Sawbridge at the Three Flower-de-luces in Little-Brittain, and Sold by J. Nutt near Stationers-Hall. 1704. Price Six-pence
 ------ ------ THE Argument, &c. THE Plaintiff brings an Action upon the Case in Banco Regis against the Defendant, late Sheriff of Suffolk, setting forth, that a Writ issued for Choosing of a Knight for that County to serve in the then Parliament instead of Sir Henry North, deceased, That at the next County Court the Freeholders proceeded to an Election; and altho' the Plaintiff was duly chosen per majorem numerum Gentium tunc resident. infra dictum Comitatum, quorum; tunc quilibet expendere potuit 40s. lib. Tenement. & ultra per Annum infra Comitat' illum, ac licet praedictus. Willielmus premissa satis sciens postea Breve. praedict. in Cur' Cancellar' retornavit, simul cum quadam Indentura int' ipsum Vicecomitum & praedict. Electores ipsius Samuelis de praedicta Electione ipsius Samuelis fact' sec' exigentiam Brevis praedict. Praedict. tamen Willielmus ad hunc Vicecomes Officii sui debitum minime ponderans, sed Machinans & Malitiose intendens ipsum Samuelem in hac parte minus rite per praegravare & eundem Samuelem de fiducia unius Mil. Com' praedict. in dict. Parliamento exercend' omino frustrare & deprivare, & praedict Samuelem ad diversas magnas & grandes Pecun' Summas expendend' causare contra Debitum Officii sui praedict. Falso, Malitiose & Deceptive ad tunc in eadem Cancellar. apud Westm. praedict. retornavit una cum Indentura praed. quandam al' Indentur' eidem Brevi scilicet annex. specificans illam forefact int' praefat Willielm' &c. ex una parte & diversas al' personas dict' Comitat' in Indentur' ill' specificat' & content' qd. dict. al' personae & Major pars totius Com' praed. in praed. pleno Comitat' elegerunt quendam Lionellum Tallmash Bar al' dict. Dom. Huntingtowr in Regno Scotiae. Henrici North un' Mil. Com. Suff. praedict. pro Parliament. praedict. adveniend. eidem Parliamento pro Com. illo. Ubi revera praedictus Lionellus non fuit Electus per Majorem partem prout per ult. Indentur' falso supponitur Ratione cujus quidem falsi retorn. de praedict. al Indentur' &c. idem Samuel. in domum inferiorem pro Communitat. hujus Regni Angl. &c. Assemblat. admitt' non potuit, quousq; idem Samuel. per Petitionem suam Communitat. dict. Parliamenti pro remedio congruo exhibit. & post diversas ingentes denar' Summas in & citra manifestationem & verificationem dict. Electionis coram dict. communitat. expendit. & diversos labores in ea parte sustent. postea scil. &c. communitat. in domum communit. praedict. admissus fuit & Elect. ipsius Samuel per communitat. declarat. fuit fore bona unde deteriorat, est & damn. habet. ad valen. 3000l.
 There is a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and Damages found to the value of 800l. and Judgment thereupon, and a Writ of Error is brought to Reverse that Judgment. 
I have but little Time left to say what I have to offer, it being very Late; and yet I must desire leave to produce those Reasons, I have in Maintenance of my Opinion; I will be careful not to detain you longer than will be necessary.
 And therefore I will not trouble you with Stating the Case again, nor will I speak of any Exceptions that have been made to the Declaration, for I love not the Niceties of the Law in Cases where they do prevail; And in this Case I have only considered the Foundations of the Action; which if I had found well established upon Reason, or the Grounds of the Law, I would have examined what has been objected to the Forms of Declarations, which must have brought great Weight to have over-turn'd these Proceedings.
 But as to the Point of the Action, upon the most serious Consideration I would have of it, and weighing what hath been before now, and also at this time, said in support of it; I am of Opinion that the Judgment ought to be Reversed; for that no such Action as this, at Bar, does lye by the Common-Law
 Because this is a Cause of considerable Value, great Damages being Recovered; because it is a Judgment of great Authority, being upon a Cause Tryed at the King's-Bench-Bar, and given upon Deliberation there; because it is a Case of an extraordinary Nature, and of great Import, each Party pretending Benefit to the Parliament; because it is an Action Primae Impressionis, that never was before Adjudged, the Report of which will be listned after; I have taken Pains to collect and set down the Reasons, that I must go upon in determining this Case; that as the Judgment had the Countenance of some Deliberation in the Court where it was given; so the Reversal being with greater Deliberation, may appear grounded upon Reasons that ought to prevail.
 I can say with my Brother Wyndham, that I love rather to affirm Judgments, then to reverse them; but I can attribute nothing of Authority to the Judgment, tho' it were given in a Superior Court, and upon Deliberation. I must Judge of it as if the Case came to be Judg'd originally by me: The Argument to support a Judgment from the Authority of it self, is, Exceptio ejusdem rei cujus petitur Dissolutio, which ought not to be admitted in Cases of Writs of Error. We are intrusted to Examine and Correct the Errors of that Court, and for that purpose we are made Superior to it; we must proceed according to our own Knowledge and Discretion, or else we do not perform the Trust Reposed in us.
 I must needs say this is a Cause that imports it more then any Cause I have known to come before us, for it is a Cause Primae Impressionis; and the Question is, whether by this Judgment a Change of the CommonLaw be introduced. It is the Principal Use of Writs of Error, and Appeals to hinder the Change of the Law; therefore do Writs of Error in our Law, and Appeals in the Civil Law, carry Judgments and Decrees to be Examin'd by Superior Courts until they come to the highest, who are entrusted that they will not change the Law.
 Therefore do Writs of Error lye from Ireland, which is a Subordinate Kingdom to England, by whose Laws it is governed; that they might not be able to change the Law by their Judgments, and not so much for the particular Right of the Party.
 For otherwise it wou'd be very easy for Judges by Construction and Interpretation to change even a Written Law, and it would be most easy for the Judges of the Common-Laws of England, which are not Written, but depend upon Usage to make a Change in them, especially if they may justify themselves by such a Rule as my Brother Atkyns lays down to support this Case; viz. That the Common-Law complies with the Genius of the Nation. I admit that the Laws are fitted to the Genius of the Nation; but when that Genius Changes, the Parliament is only intrusted to Judge of it, and by changing the Law to make it suitable to it: But if Judges shall say it is Common-Law because it suits with the Genius of the Nation; they may take upon 'em to change the whole as well as any part of it, the Consequence whereof may easily be seen; I wish we had not found it by sad Experience.
 If the Case at the Bar be a Change of the Law, it is happy it comes to be question'd in the first Instance; for if this Cause had been any way agreed and quieted, and a second Case of this Nature had been questioned, there wou'd have been a President urg'd, which cannot be spoke of here; for this Case hath no Fellow, there never having been the like Judgment before.
 The Method I shall take in what I have to say shall be,
 1st, To Remove some prejudice the Case is under.
 2dly, Give my Reasons against the Action.
 3dly, Weigh what hath been said to maintain the Action.
 1st. The Case is under this Prejudice, That an Action of the Case lyes for false Returns of Sheriffs; and why should it not lye in this Case as well as any other.
 To Remove this Prejudice I shall shew some material Differences betwixt the Nature of Ordinary Returns and this Return.
 In Ordinary Returns the Party is Concluded, and absolutely without Remedy; for the Court must take the Return as the Sheriff makes it. In Ordinary Cases the Sheriff may, and frequently does, take Security of the Plaintiff, or the Sheriff hath means by Law to be Secure; as if he doubts the Property of the Goods, he may return upon a fieri facias, Nullus venit ad monstrandum bona. In some Cases he may for his safety, Impannel a Jury, as upon an Elegit, or he may Resort to the Court, and pray reasonable Time to prepare his Return, if the Matter be difficult; and hath other shelters, that if he be wary, will save him from Danger.
 But in this Case the Party is not Concluded, for upon a Petition to the Parliament, if they see it Just, they will cause the Return to be alter'd by the Clerk of the Crown, if the Sheriff be not in the Way; in this Case the Sheriff may not take Security, it were Criminal in him to make such a Return by Compact, nor can the Sheriff make a Fruitless Return, or obtain Delay to consult his Safety. 
These Differences are of that Nature, that they change the Case in the Reason of it, as I shall hereafter make appear: And no Man can infer because an Action lyes for false Returns in Ordinary Cases; therefore it lyes in Case of a Return to Parliament, where the Sheriff is clearly upon Terms.
 My Reasons against this Action are applicable to this Case, and make it different from all the Cases that have been put by my Brothers that Argued for the Action: I observe they Argued only upon Generals, without any other Application to this Case than by the Topick of concluding a Minori ad Majus, because Actions lay in Cases of Inferiour Nature, therefore it will lye in this; which Rules hold not in diverse Cases where there are particular Reasons to the contrary, as I shall by and by shew to be in this.
 2dly, I shall give you my Reasons against this Action, which are as follow.
 1st. My first Reason is this, because the Sheriff as to the declaring the Majority is Judge, and no Action will lye against a Judge; for what he does Judicially, tho' it should be laid Falso, Malitiose & Scienter, as appears in Co. 12 Rep. fol. 24. They who are intrusted to Judge, ought to be free from Vexation, that they may Determine without Fear; the Law requires Courage in a Judge, and therefore provides Security for the Support of that Courage. But,
 1. Is the Sheriff a Judge in this Case? And
 2. Is there the same Reason he should be freed from all Actions?
 As to the First, it is of Necessity, that as to the declaring the Majority, he should be the Judge upon the Place, in other Cases in the County Court; the Free Suiters are the Judges, and he is the Minister: When we say the Free Suiters, we mean the Major part of them is to Judge; but when the Question is, which is the Major Part, they cannot Determine the Question; but of Necessity the Sheriff must determine that, the Nature of the thing speaks it.
 Therefore it was held rightly in Letchmer's Case, 13 and 14 Car. 2. that as to the Election of Knights to the Parliament, the Court is properly the Sheriff's Court, and the Writ is in the nature of a special Commission, Elegi facias.
 I know a Judge may have many Ministerial Acts Incumbent upon him, as the Chief Justices have to certifie Records upon Writs of Error; Therefore it is necessary for me to observe, that the Suit here is for what he does as a Judge, and not for any thing Ministerial that appears by the Averment, that the Sheriff annexed another Indenture, specifying to be made by the Major part of the Freeholders, and containing that the Lord Huntingtowr was Chosen, Ubi re vera, The Lord Huntingtowr was not Chosen by the Major part of the Freeholders. If it had been said ubi re vera, the Freeholders supposed to Seal the same, never did Seal the same, there had been a falsity in his Ministerial part of sending in the Indenture; but his sending Two Indentures, which were really Sealed by the Freeholders, as they import; wherein the Freeholders of each Indenture (and not the Sheriff) say that they are the Major part, is no falsity in his Ministerial part, but only defering to Judge between them, which is the Major part, or more properly judging that they are both equal in Number.
 They Object that the Matter of this Question is not matter of Judgment, 'tis but counting the Poll, which requires Arithmetick, but not Judgment; but certainly if it be rightly consider'd, it will be thought this Question of Majority is not barely a Question of Fact, but a Question of Judgment, a Question of Difficult Judgment, there are so many Qualifications of Electors.
 1. They must have 40s per Annum, there the Value must be judged.
 2. It must be Freehold; there the Title
 3. It must be their own; there colourable and fraudulent Gifts made many times on purpose to get Voices, must be Judged.
 4. The Electors must be Resident; there the Settlement of the Party must be Determin'd.
 5. There are many things that incapacitate Voices, as Bribery, Force, &c. and many other Questions arise, that are of such Difficulty, that in Debate of them, much time is spent in Parliament; and sometimes a Committee Determines one way, and the House another. Is not this then a Question that refers to Judgment?
 They Object again, the Sheriff may give an Oath concerning all the Qualifications, and he is to look no further.
 I Answer, The Statute has given the Sheriff Power to give an Oath in Assistance of him; but the Statute does not say that whosoever takes that Oath shall have a Voice: Neither does the Statute 23. H. 6. say that the Sheriffs shall not be charged with a False Return that pursues that way; so that altho' he may use those Means for his Direction, yet he must consider his own Safety, and not make a False Return; if a Man upon taking such an Oath, give the Sheriff a special Answer, or it should be known to the Sheriff he Swears False; the Sheriff must Determine according to his own Judgment, and not by what is Sworn.
 It may hence be concluded that the Sheriff, as to declaring the Majority, is a Judge; and if so, my next Assertion is, That there is the same Reason he should be free from Actions, as any Judge in Westminster-Hall, or any other Judge. Does it not Import the Publick that the Sheriff should deal uprightly and impartially? Ought he not to have Courage, and for that End should not the Law provide him Security?
 Consider his Disadvantages, what a Noise and Crowd accompany such Elections; what Importunity, nay what Violence there is upon him from the Contesting Partys. 
We may say no other Judge has more need of Courage and Resolution to manage himself, and Determine uprightly, than he. No other Judge Determines in a Case of greater Consequence to the Publick, or Difficulty than he; Expose him to such Actions, and in most Elections he must have Trouble; for commonly each Party is Confident of his Strength, his Conduct and his Friends; that let the Sheriff Return never so uprightly, the Party that is Rejected will Revenge it by such, especially if he may Sue at Common-Law, to have boundless Damages, without running any Hazard himself, but of the Loss of his Costs.
 If we Judges that find our selves Secure from Actions, should not be tender of others, that are in the same Circumstances. It may well be said, Wo unto you, for you impose heavy Burthens upon others, but will not bear the least of them your Selves.
 2. My Second Reason is, because it is alieni fori, either to examine the Right of the Election, or Behaviour of the Sheriff; both which are Incident, and indeed the only Considerations that can guide in the Tryal of such Causes, if they be allowed.
 It is admitted that the Parliament is the only proper Judicature, to determine the Right of Election, and to censure the Behaviour of the Sheriff. How then can the Common-Law Try a Cause, that cannot Determine of those Things, without which the Cause cannot be Try'd?
 No Action upon the Case will lie for Breach of the Trust, because the Determination of the Principal Thing, the Trust, does not belong to the Common-Law, but to the Court of Chancery: Certainly the Reason of the Case at Bar is Stronger, as the Parliament ought to have more Reverence than the Court of Chancery.
 They Object that it may be Tryed after the Parliament hath Decided the Election; for then that which the Common-Law could not try is Determined, and the Parliament cannot give the Party the Costs he is put unto.
 Then I perceive they wou'd have the Determination of the Parliament binding to the Sheriff in the Action, which it cannot be; for that is between other Parties to which the Sheriff is not call'd: It is against the Course of Law, that any Judgment, Decree or Proceeding betwixt other Parties should bind the Interest of, or any way Conclude a Third Person; no more ought it to do here, it may be easy for Parties combining to represent a Case so to the Parliament, that the Right of Election may appear either way as the Parties please. It is fit the Sheriff, who is not admitted to controvert such Determination, should be Concluded by it, in an Action brought against him to make him pay the Reckoning.
 Did the Parliament believe, when then they Determined this Election, that they pass'd Sentence against the Sheriff, upon which he must pay 800l. Sure if they had imagin'd so they would, nay in Justice they ought to have heard his Defence before they Determin'd it?
 And yet that was the Measure of this Case, the Sheriff was not heard in Parliament, indeed he was not blam'd there, and yet upon the Tryal which concern'd him so deeply, he was not allow'd to defend himself by any Majority or Equality of Voices, the Parliament having Determin'd the Election.
 I do not by these Reflections Tax the Law of Injustice, or the Course of Parliament of Inconvenience; I am an Admirer of the Methods of both, it is from the Excellency of them I conclude this Proceeding in this new fangled Action, being Absurd, Unjust and Unreasonable, cannot be Legal.
 To Answer the other Branch of this Objection, I say it does not follow; that because the Parliament cannot give Costs; therefore this new devised Action must lie to help the Party to them.
 For then such an Action might as well lie in all Cases, where there is a Wrong to be Remedyed by Course of Law, and no Costs are given for it.
 At the Common-Law no Costs were given in any Case, and many Cases remain at this Day where the Statutes have given no Costs, as in a Prohibition, Scire facias, and quare impedit, and divers other Cases; and yet no Action will lie to recover those Costs, and why should it lie in the Case at Bar?
 In this Case the Parliament have already had it under their Consideration in the Statute 23. H. 6 and have appointed what shall be Paid by the Sheriff that offends, viz. 100l. to the Party, 100l. to the King, and Imprisonment; the Parliament have Stated what shall be paid for Compensation, and what for Punishment, and would have provided for Costs if they had thought fit.
 3. My Third Reason is, because a Double Return is a lawful Means for the Sheriff to perform his Duty in doubtful Cases.
 If this be so, then all Aggravations of Falso Malitiose & Scienter will not make the thing Actionable; for whatever a Man may do for his Safety cannot be the Ground of an Action.
 There is sometimes Damnum absq; Injuria, tho' the thing be done on purpose to bring a Loss upon another, without any Design of Benefit to himself; as if a New House be Erected Contiguous to my Ground, I may Build any thing on purpose to blind the Lights of that New House, and no Action will accrue, tho' the Malice were never so great; much less will it lie where a Man acts for his own Safety.
 If a Jury will find a Special Verdict; if a Judge will Advise and take time to Consider; if a Bishop will Delay a Patron, and Impannel a Jury to enquire of the Right of Patronage, you cannot bring an Action for these Delays, tho' you suppose it to be done Maliciously, and on purpose to put you to Charges; tho' you suppose it done Scienter, knowing the Law to be clear; for they take but the Liberty the Law has provided for their Safety, and there can be no Demonstration that they have not real Doubts, for they are within their own Breasts: It would be very Mischievous that a Man might not have leave to Doubt without so great Peril.
 The Course of Parliament makes out the Ground of this Reason to be true in Fact, so that a Double Return is lawful when the Sheriff Doubts; for if the Parliament did not allow a Double Return in Doubtful Cases, they ought never to accept a Double Return: If it were in it self a void and unlawful Return, they ought not to endure it a Moment, but send for the Sheriff and compel him to make a single Return; but we see where there is Doubt, the Parliament sends not for the Sheriff before they have Examin'd the Case, and give particular Directions.
 And it must of Necessity be the Course, for suppose the Voices are Equal; suppose the Election is Void for Force; Suppose the Sheriff Doubts upon the Validity of some Voices, shall he Transmit his Doubts, specially to the Parliament? Was there ever any such thing done? Was there ever any other way but to make a Double Return, and leave it fairly to the Decision of the Parliament?
 It was said by my Brother Ellis, that if the Sheriff had Return'd in the Nature of a Special Verdict, the Special Matter, and had concluded in this manner, (viz.) If the Parliament shall Adjudge Sir Samuel Bernardiston to be Chosen, then he Returns him, and if the Parliament shall Adjudge the Lord Huntingtowr to be Chosen, then he Returns him, that such a Return as this had been Safe, and cou'd not have born an Action.
 This is a pretty Invention found out for Argument sake, but methinks it Furnishes no Force at all to the Part for which it is brought, but rather shews the Right to be the other way; for let any Man of Reason say, whether a Double Return, as it is now used, be not the same thing in Consequence; Is not a Double Return as if the Sheriff should say to the Parliament (the Right of Election is between these Two, I am in Doubt which of them I shall Reject, and expect your Directions) this is the Import of a Double Return, and is the same in Effect, as if it had Concluded in a Special Verdict, and so my Brother Ellis's Instance should not be Actionable tho' he Concluded otherwise.
 That other new fangled could not be receiv'd. -- For,
 1. The Freeholders would never joyn in such a Return.
 2. Such a Return is not capable of being Amended by the Sheriff.
 But the Judgment of the Parliament must be Enter'd upon Record to make it any Return, it concluding nothing of it self, as a special Verdict concludes, till the Judgment of the Court be Enter'd upon the Roll.
 3. The Parliament will not, as I believe, admit of new Devices in the Course of their Proceedings, whatever we do at Law.
 But the Double Return is Practicable in the Country, for the Freeholders of each Part will Tender their Indentures; and it is easily Amended in Parliament by Rejecting the Indenture of those Freeholders that were not the Major Part, which way has been Practis'd in doubtful Cases for many years.
 So that I apprehend the Case at Bar to be more regular and favourable, than that Case which my Brother Ellis put as a Case that would not bear an Action. 
Again; Suppose the Sheriff had inform'd the Parliament of his Doubts, and that he could not readily determine where the Majority was, but it was betwixt two Persons, A. and B. and thereupon desir'd their Favour either to grant him Time to Determine it, if they pleas'd to Command him so to do, or else, that they would Decide it themselves, and he would obey what Directions they should make in it, and thereupon the Parliament had taken upon themselves to determine it.
 This most clearly had not been Actionable, for it is not Actionable to delay a Return, to any Court of Justice, where the Sheriff hath Leave from the Court so to do.
 A double Return, in my Understanding speaks the same thing, to the Parliament, and upon it they may either direct the Sheriff to make a single Return, which is to cause him to decide it, or they may do it themselves.
 And here I must needs reflect upon the second Reason I have against this Action, that the Matter of it is alieni fori; I find my self and my Brothers that Argued for the Action, engag'd in a Discourse of the nature of a double Return, and the Course of Parliament upon it, which, as a Judge I cannot so well speak to; I had the Honour to be of this House of Commons, and whilst I was there, I considered as well as I cou'd the Course of the Proceedings of the House, and am therefore able to speak something of them, and I am brought into this Discourse necessarily by this Action; But I must needs say it is an improper Discourse for Judges, for they know not what is the Course of Parliament, nor the Privilege of Parliament. When the Lords in Parliament, whom they are bound to assist with their Advice, ask the Juges any thing concerning the Course or privilege of Parliament, they have answer'd, that they know them not, nor can advise concerning them.
 If in Parliament we do not know nor can advise concerning these things, How can we judge people upon them out of Parliament, we ought to know before we judge, and therefore we cannot judge of things we cannot know.
 Our being engag'd in a Discourse improper for Judges, shews the Action to be improper, as much as any other Argument that can be made, and this Argument arises from my Brothers that argued for the Action.
 But now I am in this Discourse, I must go a little farther; My Observation from the Course of Parliament has been, that they will not permit the Sheriff to delay his Return, to deliberate, and he cannot take Security of either Party; and if a single Return be not justified by the Committee of Elections, he is danger of the Statute of 23. H. 6.
 It follows that there is no ways for an innocent Sheriff to be safe, where he conceives Doubt, but in making a double Return, and if that should be Actionable too, the Service of the Parliament would be the most ungrateful Service in the World.
 It seems ridiculous to me that it should be objected, that this Course of Law is necessary to prevent the great Mischief arising from double Returns, when, as if it be a Mischief, or dislik'd by the Parliament, either in General or any Particular Case; they may Reject them when they please, and Command the Sheriff to make a Single Return; so they may Remedy it by their Practice, without their Legislative Power.
 Their Practice hitherto hath been to receive Double Returns, which therefore in some Cases must be lawful, and in this very Case the Double Return was accepted, and the Sheriff no way Punish'd for it; which he ought to have been, if he had been Blameable.
 If Double Returns are accepted by Parliament, they are allow'd, and we must say they are lawful, which is the Ground of my Third Reason; for which I hold this Action not Maintainable,
 4. My Fourth Reason is, That there is no Legal Damages occasion'd by the Sheriff. The Damages laid in the Declaration are,
 1. Being kept from Sitting in the House.
 2. The Pains and Charges he was put unto to get his Admittance into the House.
 1. That of his being kept from Siting in the House, is as much every Man's Damage in the whole County, nay in the whole Kingdom; and any Man else might as well have an Action for it as the Member Chosen.
 To Sit in Parliament is a Service in the Member, for the Benefit of the King and Kingdom; and not for the Profit of the Member.
 It is a Rule in Law, that no particular Man may bring an Action for a Nusance to the King's High-way; because all the Men in England might as well have Actions which would be Infinite; and therefore such an Offence is Punishable only by Indictment, except there be Special Loss occasion'd by that Nusance.
 For the same Reason, the Exclusion of a Member from the House being as much Damage to all Men in England as to himself: He nor any Man else can have an Action for it, but it is punishable upon the Publick Score, and not otherwise.
 For this Reason was the Statute 23. H. 6. wisely consider'd, by that Statute the Action is not given to the Party for his particular Damage; but the Action given is a Popular Action, only the Party Griev'd hath a Preference for Six Months; but if he do not Sue in that time, every Man else is at Liberty to recover the same Sum.
 2. The other Point of Damage is the Pains and Charges he was put unto, and that is not occasion'd by the Sheriff, but by the Deliberation of the House. Why should the Sheriff Pay for that? It may be if the Parliament had sent for the Sheriff the first Day, and blam'd the Double Return, he would have ventur'd to Determine the Matter speedily, and there should have been no Cause of Complaint for Delay; but the Parliament saw so much Cause of Doubt, that they think it not fit to put the Sheriff to Determine, but to resolve to examine the Matter, and give him Directions that may guide him in mending his Return; thereupon they give a Day to the Parties on both Sides, and finding the Matter of long Examination, and withal Difficult, they Deliberate upon it.
 It seems very unreasonable the Sheriff should be made Pay for this, which he did not occasion; but was a Course taken by the Parliament for their own Satisfaction, who found no fault in the Sheriff for putting them to all that Trouble. 
Suppose Sir Samuel Barnardiston had been Return'd alone, and the Lord Huntingtowr had Petitioned against that Return, there had been the same Charge to have defended that Return; so that it was the Contest of the opposite Party that occasioned the Charge, the Deliberation of the Parliament that occasion'd the Delay; but neither of them can be imputed to the Sheriff.
 I cannot difference this Case from the Case of bringing an Action against a Jury, for maliciously, knowingly, and on purpose to put the Party to Charges, finding a Matter specially whereby great Delay and great Expences were, before the Party could obtain Judgment; and yet I think no Man will affirm that an Action will lie in this Case.
 In this Case the Damages are found Entire, so that if both Parts, viz. the not Sitting in the House, and the Pains and Charges are not Actionable Causes of Damages; it will be Intended the Jury gave for both, and so the Judgment is for that Cause Erroneous.
 I suppose the Wages of Parliament will not be mention'd for Damages, for in most Places they are only Imaginary, being not Demanded; but if there were to be any Consideration of them, it will not alter this Case; for upon this Return they are due as from the First Day, and so no Damage can be pretended upon that Score.
 5. My Fifth Reason is drawn from the Statute of 23. H. 6. which has been so often mention'd; that Statute is a great Evidence to me, that no Action lay by the Common-Law against a Sheriff, for a False Return of a Writ of Election to the Parliament; and this Evidence is much strengthned by the Observation that hath been made, that never any Action was brought otherwise than upon that Statute.
 I must admit, that if an Action lay by the Common-Law, this Statute hath not taken it away, for there are no Negative Words in the Statute; but it is not likely the Parliament would have made that Law, if there had been any Remedy for the Party before.
 The Statute observes that some Laws had been made before for preventing False Returns, but there was not convenient Remedy for the Party griev'd, and therefore gives him an Action for 100l. If the Courts of Justice had by the Common-Laws Jurisdiction to examine Misdemeanors concerning the Returns of Sheriffs to the Parliament: What needed the Parliament to be so Elaborate to provide Law after Law, to give them Power therein, and at last to the Griev'd an Action? Can any Man imagine but that the Parliament took the Law to be that the Party was without Remedy? I know Preambles of Acts of Parliament are not always Gospel, but it becomes us, I am sure, to have Respect to them, and not to impute any Falsity or Failing to them, especially where constant Usage speaks for them.
 It has been Objected that in those Times it was Reckon'd a Damage, to be Return'd to serve in Parliament, which is the Reason that no Man then did bring his Action against the Sheriffs for Returning another in his stead. This cannot be true, for the Statute calls him the Party Griev'd, and is Elaborate in providing Convenient Remedy for him; and we see by the many Statutes about those Times, that it was Mischief very frequent, and there wanted no Occasion for those Actions; which does extreamly strengthen the Argument of the Non-User of this pretended Common-Law. 
An Action upon the Case, where it may be brought, is a Plaister that fits its self for all Times and all Sores; and if such an Action might then have been brought, there was no need for the Parliament to provide a Convenient Remedy.
 By Littleton's Rule, often mention'd by my Brothers, we may conclude this Action will not lie; for if such an Action had lain, it would have been brought before this time.
 In the Case of Buckley against Rice Thomas, in Plowden's Commentaries, 118, which appears to be so elaborately Argued both at Bar and Bench; if this Common-Law had been thought upon, they might have prevented the Question, whether the Sheriffs of Wales were bound by the Statute 23. H. 6?
 It seems plain to me that the Makers of the said Statute were Ignorant of this Common-Law, and yet my Brother Thurland observes the Judges in those Times, usually assisted in the Penning of the Laws.
 The Judges and Councel in the time of Buckley's Case, were ignorant of this Common-Law, else it would have been mention'd in the Argument of that Case.
 This Common-Law was never Reveal'd, that I find, until a Time there were divers other New Lights: I mean these Times, when Nevil brought an Action for a False Return against Stroud, during the late Troubles; but in those Times it could never obtain Judgment. I have heard that the Court of Common-Pleas sent the Record to the Parliament, as a Case too Difficult for the Courts of Common-Law to Determine.
 The Statute of 23. H. 6. is not only Evidence that no such Action lay at the Common-Law; but in my Opinion is not consistent with any Remedy at the Common-Law, unless it be allow'd that the Party shall be doubly Punished,
 If the Party Griev'd has brought his Action upon the Statute and recovered, it was admitted by the Councel, that no Action can be brought at the Common-Law, nor E' Contra can he Recover by the Statute, after he has Recovered by the Common-Law, because Nemo bis punitur pro eodem delicto.
 So far it stands well, but suppose the Party Grieved has let slip his time of Three Months, and then a Third Person bring a Popular Action, and Recovers 100l. upon the Statute, there is nothing can barr the Party Grieved from his Action at the Common-Law, for his Sitting still will not Conclude him; no Statute of Limitations extending to this Case, and if it be so, then must the Party, besides his Fine and Imprisonment, be doubly punished by this Statute; which was made as the Letter of it Imports, because there wanted Convenient Remedy.
 And now I am Discoursing of this Statute, I must observe the great Wisdom of the Course of Parliament in these Cases, which hath in great Measure prevented the bringing Actions against Sheriffs, even upon this Statute.
 Where the Sheriff mistakes the Person in his Return, he incurrs the Penalty of 23, H. 6. tho' it be without any Malice; and it may happen that were 21 Electors, and 20 of the other; the Sheriff Returns him that hath 21, and the Parliament adjudging an Incapacity of 2 of the 21, may Determine that he that had the 20 Voices was duly Chosen; in such Case the Sheriff hath made a False Return within the Penalty of the Statute 23. H. 6. and no Evidence shall be given against the Determination of the Parliament.
 This was a very hard Case for the Sheriff, and if we were lyable to such a Mischief, many a past Sheriff might be awaken'd that takes himself to be secure.
 But the Course of Parliament prevents this as it is Reason, for immediately upon their Determination, they send for the Sheriff, and cause him to amend his Return; and thence forward the amended Return is the Sheriffs Return, and there is no Record that can Warrant any Action to be brought for a False Return: As when the Marshal of the King's-Bench or Warden of the Fleet have made an Improvident Return, omitting some Causes wherewith the Prisoner stood Charg'd in their Custody, whereby they became lyable to Action; they frequently move the Court to amend the Return, and when the Return is Amended, all is set Right, for there is no Averring against a Record: In like manner, when the Sheriff hath Amended his Return, he is secure from any Action upon that Occasion.
 By this means there has of late years been no recovery upon the Statute, because all Persons choose rather to compel the Sheriff to amend his Return, that they might be admitted to sit in the House, than to take their Remedy upon the Statute, and no man can recover upon the Statute first, and have afterwards their Return amended, for I have been told, that by the Course of Parliament, unless the Petition be lodg'd within in some few days after the Return, it cannot be received afterwards. So that a Man cannot upon that Statute have Remedy at Law, and also in Parliament which seems to be wisely provided to prevent any Contrariety of Determinations.
 This Statute of 23. H. 6. furnish'd those that Argued for this Action with one Argument, which doth now vanish; they said that all the Inconveniencies that could be objected to this Action, were the same upon the Statute of 23. H. 6. viz. That upon that Statute the Right Election must be examin'd upon a Tryal, where there might be a Contrariety of Determinations; for it appears by what I have said, that there can be no Contrariety of Determinations.
 And there are other Inconveniences in the Remedy by the CommonLaw, which are not in the Remedy given by the Statute, the Sum to be recover'd is Limited, the Informer hath a time prefix'd, so that there are Bounds set which cannot be exceeded; but the Remedy by the Common-Law is without Limitation of Time, which is Considerable; for all Sheriffs that ever made any Return, otherwise than the Parliament Determin'd, will be lyable during their whole Lives, to them that will call them to Account for it; I say this is without Limitation of Time, without Measure of Damages, or any Rules contain'd in a Written Law; it depends upon a general Notion of Remedy, which may be enlarged by Construction, as it is now introduced without President. 
To finish my Observation upon this Statute? I say it is great Wisdom in the Parliament to call the Sheriff to Amend the Return, and to prevent any Remedy upon the Statute 23. H. 6. for I do not see that the Rules of Law, concerning Elections, are so manifestly clear and known that it is fit that the Sheriff should upon all Returns that are Corrected by the Parliament, pay the Reckoning of the Contest.
 6. I have a sixth Reason against this Action, which is because the Sheriff is not admitted to take Security to save him harmless in such Cases, I take this Reason to be Instar Omnium, and there needs no other in the Case.
 It were the most unreasonable and grievous thing in the World, that the Sheriffs should be bound to Act without any Deliberation, and not to be allow'd to take any Security, and yet be liable to an Action which way soever he takes, there is no Course can avoid it, but this of a Double Return, as I have before shewn.
 It has not been said, by any that Argued the other way, That the Sheriff may take Security; and, I suppose, will not be said, for it would be a dangerous Course for Parliaments, for then the most Litigious Man must be Return'd, and not he which is truly Chosen.
 If the Sheriff may not take Security, the Law must be his Security. It was an Argument us'd by my Brother Ellis, That because the Law imposes an Officer, to wit, the Sheriff, there the Law must give the Party an Action against that Officer, if he Misdemean himself, the Argument does not hold Universally, for the Law imposes a Judge, and yet no Action lies against him; but the Reason of that Argument, if turn'd the other way, is Irrefragable, as thus: The Law will not suffer the Sheriff to take a Security, therefore the Law must be his Security, else it were a most unreasonable Law; this Reason of it self is sufficient to bear the whole Case, for no Case can be put in our Law where a Man is compell'd to Judge without Deliberation; he cannot take Security, and yet shall be lyable to an Action.
 I have two more Reasons to add, upon which I lay great Weight, tho' they depend not upon any Particular Circumstances of this Case, but the general Consideration of it.
 1. That it is a New Invention.
 2. That it Relates to the Parliament.
 I. As it is a New Invention it ought to be Examin'd very strictly, and have no Allowance of Favour at the End, and it will have the same Fortune that many other Novelties heretofore attempted in our Law, have had. 
Actions upon the Case have sometimes been revived in new Cases, where it stands with the Rules of Law, and no Inconvenience appears, but they have been more often Rejected: I shall Instance some Cases that have been Rejected, because it will be Manifest by them, that all the Arguments and Positions laid down by my Brothers that would support the Action, are as well applicable to several Cases that have been already rejected, as to the Case at Bar.
 An Action upon the Case was brought against a Grand Jury-Man, for falsly and maliciously conspiring to Indite another, and adjudged it would not lie.
 Against a Witness for Testifying falsly and maliciously.
 Against a Judge for Acting falsly and maliciously, but Adjudged that no Action wou'd lie in those Cases.
 These Three Instances are applicable to every Argument urg'd for this Action: The Arguments my Brothers made in depressing Falsity and Malice, those which they made from the Comparison of other Actions upon the Case of Minore ad Majus; the Argument that because the Law Imposes the Officer, it will punish the Malice, has the same Force in the Case of a Judge, Indictor or Witness, and yet my Brothers admit in those Cases an Action will not lie, which shews the Invalidity of those Arguments.
 Now I shall give other Instances, where Actions upon the Case have been Rejected for Novelty, and Reasons of Inconvenience.
 An action of the Case was brought against the Lord of a Mannor for not admitting a Copy-holder, and it was adjudg'd it would not lie. Cro. Jac. 368.
 There was a Verdict found, and Damages given by the Jury in that Case, the Lord is compellable in Chancery to admit a Copy-holder, and what harm would it have been, if there might have been a remedy given by the common Law, there being a Custom broken, by which the Lord was bound. The Reasons of the Book are, because it was a Novelty, and it would be vexatious, if every Copy-holder should have an Action against the Lord, when he refused to admit him upon his own Terms.
 It has been adjudged that an Action upon the Case will not lie for the Breach of a Trust, because the Common Law cannot try what a Trust is; but if such Actions were allow'd, the Law might declare that to be a Trust, which the Court of Chancery, which properly Judges of Trusts, might say is none; and where the Common Law cannot examine the Principal Matter, the Damages that were but dependant upon it shall not be regarded.
 Anthony Maddison brought an Action against Skipwith, for maliciously killing Sir Tho. Wortley, the Case was thus; The Plaintiff was a young Lawyer that had expended all his Gains in the Purchase of a Rent that was determinable, upon the Death of Sir Tho. Wortley; Skipwith quarrell'd with Sir Thomas Wortley about a Mistress, and kill'd him, whereby Maddison lost his Rent; it was held the Action would not lie, tho' it were laid to be done maliciously, on purpose to determine the Plaintiffs Rent.
 I observ'd in that Case, that altho' Mr. Maddison knew very well that there was a Mistress in the Case, and that the Rent was not aim'd at; yet he would fain try his Fortune in the Suit, thinking, that a Jury perhaps out of -- Compassion to him, or to discourage the like Facts, might make the Manslayer pay him for his Loss: But the Judges would not suffer it to go on, it being a meer Device and a new fangled Action.
 It hath been held that an Action will not lie against a Parson for Suing for Tythes in Kind, knowing that there was a Modus, because it might then be perilous for any Parson to insist upon his Right.
 It was held by the Court of Common-Pleas, that no Action will lie for suing an Attorney, knowing in another Court against his Privilege; for his Means to enjoy his privilege is to claim it by Writ of Privilege; and he is not bound to claim his Privilege, nor can his Adversary know he will claim it.
 An Action was lately brought in the Kings-Bench (as I have heard) for delaying a Post-Letter maliciously, whereby the Plaintiff wanted Intelligence that might have been of great Advantage to him. The Court discountenanc'd the Action, so that it proceeded no further. It was then said (as I heard) to this effect, That if such Presidents were admitted, there could hardly be any Dealing or Correspondence but might be matter of Actions at Law; and altho' the Case depended upon proof of particular Malice, and the Defendant will be acquitted if his Case be not odious; yet we must consider there, that there is both Charge and Vexation of Mind, that attends the Defence of a just Cause, and we must not subject Men for all their Actions to such Trouble and Hazard.
 These Instances shew, that altho' an Action upon the Case be esteemed a Catholition, yet when Actions have been apply'd to new Cases, they have always been strictly examin'd, and upon Considerations of Justice or Inconvenience they have been many times rejected.
 For, tho' the Law advances Remedies, as my Brothers observed, yet it is with Consideration, that Vexation be not more advanced than Remedy.
 It is my Opinion that no new Device ever was or can be introduced into the Law, but Absurdities and Difficulties arise upon it, which were not foreseen, which makes me Jealous of admitting Novelties. But,
 2. In Matters relating to the Parliament (which is my second ground) there is no need of introducing Novelties, for the Parliament can provide new Laws to answer any Mischief that arise, and it ought to be left to them to do it.
 Especially in a Case of this Nature concerning Elections which the Parliament have already taken care of, and prescrib'd Remedies by the several Statutes that have been made concerning them, I say, in such a Case, there is little need to strain the Law.
 The Judges in all times have been tender of meddling with Matters relateing to Parliament. I do not find that ever they try'd Elections, but where Statutes give them express Power; or that they ever examin'd the Behaviour of a Sheriff, or any Officer of the Parliament, but upon those Statutes; and in Brounker's Case, Dyer, 168, the Statute was their Rule in the Star-Chamber, and they inflicted the same Punishment that is appointed by that Statute.
 If we shall allow general Cases (as an Action upon the Case is) to be apply'd to Cases relating to the Parliament, we shall at last invade Privileges of Parliament, and that great Privilege of judging of their own Privileges. 
Suppose an Action should be brought in time of Prorogation against a Member of Parliament, for that he falsly and maliciously did exhibit a Complaint of Breach of privilege to the Parliament, whereby the Party was sent for in Custody, and lost his Liberty, and was put to great Charges to acquit himself, and was acquitted by the Parliament.
 If upon such a Case the Jury should find the Defendant guilty, Why should not that Action be maintain'd as well as this at Bar? It may be said for that Action, that the Judgment of the Parliament is follow'd; and the privilege is not try'd at Law, but determin'd. 1. In the House. 2dly, It may be said the Party has no other way to recover his Charges.
 It should be dangerous to admit such an Action, for then there would be peril in claiming Privilege; for if the Party complain'd of, had the Fortune to be acquitted by the House, the Member that made the Complaint would be at the Mercy of the Jury, as to the point of Malice and Quantity of Damages. Such a President I suppose wou'd not please the Parliament, and yet it may with more Justice be the second Case, than this at the Bar the first.
 Actions may be brought for giving Parliament Protections wrongfully. Actions may be brought against the Clerk of the Parliament, Serjeant at Armes, and Speaker, for ought I know, for Executing their Offices amiss with Averments of Malice and Damage; and must Judges and Juries determine what they ought to do by their Officers? This is in effect prescribing Rules to the Parliament for them to act by.
 It cannot be seen whither we shall be drawn, if we meddle with Matters of Parliament in Actions at Law. Therefore in my Judgment the only safety is in those Bounds that are warranted by Acts of Parliament or constant Practice.
 Suppose this Action had been brought before the Election had been decided in the House, and the Jury had found one Way, and the Parliament had Determin'd contrary, how Inconsistent had this been?
 But it was said in the King's-Bench, that the Court would not try it before the Parliament had Determin'd the Election, and then that cannot be Contested, but the Judgment of the Parliament must be follow'd; and my Brother Ellis but now said, Surely no Man will be so Indiscreet as to bring such an Action before the Parliament hath Determin'd it, and the Court will not Try it before such time as the Election be Determin'd in a proper Way.
 In my Opinion this was not rightly consider'd, for how can the Court stay any Suit to expect the Determination of the Parliament? And what Reason or Justice is there, who is no Party call'd to answer in the Parliament should be concluded in any thing by a Judgment between other Parties, to defend himself from a Demand of Damages in a Court of Law, where Witnesses are not Examin'd upon Oath, which they cannot be in the Commons House?
 There is no Reason the Suit of Law should stay till the House have Determin'd the Election, if the Determination of the House be not Conclusive in that Suit.
 And for the Discretion of the Parties that are like to bring such Actions I cannot depend upon it; for I see in this Age, some Men will insist upon their private Rights, to the hindrance of Publick Affairs of higher Consequence than any that come before the Courts in Westminster-Hall. 
It may be there will not want Men that will press us to Judge in such Cases, and not only before the Parliament have Determin'd, but against what the Parliament have Determin'd; and will tell us that the Sheriff was no Party, that Witnesses were not there Examin'd upon Oath, and produce Arguments from Antiquity which we shall be loath to Judge of.
 I can see no other way to avoid Consequences derogatory to the Honour of the Parliament, but to reject the Action; and all others that shall relate either to the Proceedings or Privilege of Parliament, as our Predecessors have done.
 For if we shall admit general Remedies in Matters relating to the Parliament, we must set bounds how far they shall go, which is a dangerous Province, for if we Err, Privilege of Parliament will be invaded, which we ought not any way to endamage.
 This I speak of general Remedies: Now I will consider this particular Case, which in my Opinion, would bring Danger and Dishonour to the Parliament.
 It is Dishonourable to the Parliament that there should be not Protection in their Service; I have shewn that the Sheriff can be safe in no Case, if he shall be Sued in such a Case as this: And can there be a greater Reproach than that there is no safety in their Service? No body can serve them cheerfully and willingly at that Rate.
 It has been objected that the Sheriff is not their Officer, but is the Officer of the Court of Chancery, which sends forth the Writs and receives the Returns. The Argument is plausible, but will not pass in the Parliament; for they say the Court of Chancery is the Repository for their Writs, but will not allow them to Issue without Warrant from the House: They will not suffer the Court of Chancery to meddle with the Returns or the Sheriff. The Parliament sends immediate Order to the Sheriff, if the Return be too slow, they direct the Sheriff to Amend his Return, and they punish the Sheriff where they find him faulty; so that it appears they exercise an immediate Jurisdiction over the Sheriff. And I suppose they would Judge it very False Doctrine for us to (nor indeed can we any way) meddle with the Returns or the Officer.
 Admitting the Sheriff to act in Returns as the Officer of the Parliament; It concerns them that he should be lyable to no other Punishment but what they Inflict, otherwise they cannot expect to be obey'd.
 To have others Judge when their Servants do well, will be to have others give Rules to their Servants and Service, which they will think Inconvenient.
 Let it be considered how hard a Task Sheriffs have in their Elections of Knights to the Parliament: The Appearance commonly is very Numerous, the Parties Contesting very Violent, the Proceeding Tumultuous, the Polling sometimes is at several Places at once; so that the Sheriff can hardly be a Witness of the Action, and if the Dispute be in the House of Commons he is no Party to it. If after all this the Sheriff, who cannot indemnify himself by Security, shall be lyable to an Action, the Service of the Parliament may be reckon'd a miserable Slavery; which is not for their Honour.
 As this is Dishonourable, so it is Dangerous to Parliaments; it concerns the Kingdom that Returns to the Parliament should be upright and impartial, and that they may be so, the Sheriff should be secure from all Fears.
 Judges are not lyable to Actions, that they may Proceed uprightly and impartially; if they were subject to Suits for their Judgments, there is that earnestness and confidence on both sides, that one side would be dissatisfy'd and trouble them, and they could not discharge their Duty without Apprehensions of Disquiet.
 If the Sheriff be dispos'd to Actions thus, let us consider what and whom he is to fear: He may fear the Suit of the Party, and he may fear the Suit of the King. It follows necessarily that if an Action lies, an Information, for the King will also lie for the Misdemeanor of his Office, if it be not a Case privileged by the Complexion of it, as Parliamentary from being Examin'd in Westminster-Hall, but that he may be punish'd at the Suit of the Party, he may certainly as well be punish'd at the Suit of the King, If so, where is the Sheriff's Security? Will his own Innocence secure him? That will be Try'd by a Jury of the County where the Parliament sits; who are, it may be, Strangers to him as well as to the Matter, or by a Jury of the Country where the Election was; where, it may be, they will be of an opposite Party, the Plaintiff may wait his opportunity, and question him Twenty Years after: and if he be Condemn'd his Punishment is unlimited, a Fine may be set any height for the King, and Damages may be given to any Value for the Party: Where is his Security upon such Proceedings? Will he not be more afraid of such Punishment out of Parliament than of any Punishment in Parliament? Will not, nay may not his Terror make him desire to please them that can punish him out of Parliament, rather than to do Right? Will not that be dangerous to the Constitution of Parliaments?
 As the Punishment out of Parliament may be a Punishment to those who mean well, so colourable Punishments may be as mischievous on the other side; for they may prevent any Punishment, for Nemo bis punitur pro eodem dilicto, they may serve for Protection of Men that do it: When it is seriously weigh'd of what Consequence this may be, the Case at Bar will not be thought a Case fit to be receiv'd by the Judges without the Countenance of Law.
 They object here is Malice found by the Verdict, and that there is no Danger or Inconvenience that accrews by reason Malice, but ought to be Punish'd.
 This Objection fortifyes my Opinion; for Malice, upon which they would have the Scales turn in this Case is not a thing Demonstrative, but Interpretative, and lies in Opinion, so that it may give an Handle to any Man to punish another by.
 The Instance of this very Case shews, that a good Man may reasonably be afraid of the Event of his Defence in such a Case.
 For altho' the Matter was of great Examination in Parliament, and at last decided but by few Voices, and no observation of the Sheriffs Miscarriage there, tho' it appear'd upon the Tryal (which I may say being present there) that the Sheriff was guided by the Advice of his Friends, of Council and of Parliament Men, that told him the only safe Course was to make a double Return, yet the Jury Condemn'd him to pay 800l. against the Expectation of the Court; for the Judges that were present at the Tryal did all declare publickly that they would not have given that Verdict.
 The Jury heard all the Evidence the Jury could go upon, for being of a remote County to the place of Election; the Jury could know nothing of their own knowledge, and yet the Judges concurr'd not with the Jury in their Opinion.
 I know we are not to examine the Truth of the Verdict, we must take it for Gospel, neither do any Partiality in this particular lead me in Judgment; but I shew it as an Instance that Malice is not demonstrative; Mens Minds may be mistaken, and Innocent Men may therefore have reason to be afraid, especially in Ill Times, and may use such Means for their Safety as may not be convenient for Parliaments.
 But there can be Danger or Inconvenience in the Censure of the Parliament that represents the whole Kingdom, who hitherto have alone exercis'd this Power, and who may at any time Reform the Law, if the present Practice be any way Inconvenient.
 Upon these Reasons which I have produc'd I ground my Opinion; Now it will be necessary to weigh what hath been said in Opposition to it.
 The Arguments urg'd on the other side, related either to the Ingredients or Circumstances of this Action, or to the Foundation or Substance of it.
 I call the Ingredients and Circumstances of the Action, that it is laid with these Words; Falso, Malitiose, Deceptive, Scienter, And that there is a Verdict in this Case, and are Damages found.
 The words Falso, Malitiose, & Deceptive, will sometimes make a Thing Actionable, which is not so in it self, without Malice prov'd, tho' there be the same Damage to the Party.
 As where a Man causes another to be falsly Indicted, yet if it be not Malitiose, no Action lies, tho' there be the same Trouble, Charge and Damage in one Case as the other.
 But it is only where a Man is a voluntary Agent, for if a Man be Compellable to act, you cannot molest him upon any Averment of Malice; as if a Grand Jury-Man causes another to be Indicted, tho' you aver Malice, you cannot have an Action against him; so for a Witness that doth testify, or a Judge that judgeth.
 In the Case at Bar, the Sheriff is Compellable to act, and not barely as a Minister to send the Indenture; but as a Judge to say which is the Major Part; and if he mistakes, there is no reason it should subject him to an Action upon an Artificial Averment of Malice.
 I remember in Shepherd and Wakeman's Case in the Kings-Bench, Mr. Justice Windham said well, that the words Falso & Malitiose were grown words of course, and put into every Action; so that to his knowledge Juries many times had no regard to them, that he look'd upon them as Words of Form.
 If we should make the words Falso & Malitiose support an Action without a fit Subject Matter, all the Actions of Mankind would be liable to Suit and Vexation, they that have the Cooking (as we call it) of Declarations in Actions of the Case, if they be skilful in their Art, will be sure to put in the words Falso & Malitiose, let the Case be what it will they are here Pepper and Vinegar in a Cook's hand, that help to make Sawce for any Meat, but will not make a Dish of themselves.
 Falso & Malitiose will not enable an Action against a Judge.
 Nor against an Indictor or Witness, nor where words are not Actionable, tho' the Plaintiff hath a Verdict and Damages found, nor for a Breach of Trust, which is alieni fori. 
The reason of every one of these Cases holds in the Case at Bar. Therefore it ought to have the same Resolution.
 As to the word Scienter, it hath weight sometimes, as if an Action be brought for keeping a Dog that Worried others Sheep, Sciens Canem ad mordend' Oves cousuetud. or for detaining the Servant or Wife of another; Scienter in these Cases, if the Defendant hath been told that the Dog did worry Sheep, or that it was the Servant or Wife of another, tho' it may be he did not believe it, yet it was Scienter, for the word implies no more than having Notice; and in those Actions he must inform himself at his peril, and may if he doubts, avoid Danger, by putting away those things which give Offence. But in this Case he could receive Information by none, and is not to believe or disbelieve any body, but is bound to judge of the thing himself, and to act according to his Judgment, so that no proof could be made of the Scienter, for one side tells him the Election was one way, and the other side tells him it is the other way, but he being present to the whole Action, must follow the Dictates of his own Judgment; Hence it appears Scienter in this Case is an empty word, not referring to Notice of a Fact, but of Matter to Judgment, which cannot any way be prov'd.
 It has been often urg'd that this Case is stronger by being after a Verdict and Damages found by the Jury, and it has been said that perhaps upon a Demurrer, it might have been found more doubtful.
 The Case is the same to me upon a Verdict that it should have been upon a general Demurrer, and no stronger, for a Demurrer is the Confession of the Party of all that can be prov'd, or can possibly be found upon that Declaration.
 It is my Lord Coke's Advice in Cromwell's Case, 4th part. 14 a. never to Demur to a Declaration, if there be any hopes of the Matter of Fact; for the Matter in Law will as well serve after a Verdict, as upon Demurrer.
 The finding the Plaintiff's Damages adds no strength to the Case, for we see every day upon Actions for Words, tho' the Jury find the Defendant guilty for speaking Words Falso & Malitiose, and find it to be to the Plaintiffs great Damages, yet if the words are not such as will bear an Action, the Court stays Judgment; and if Judgment happen to be given, it is reversable for Error, which shews that the finding Damages by the Jury cannot make an Action better than if it were to be adjudged upon Demurrer.
 I shall now consider what hath been said to maintain this Action upon the Main Substance and Foundation of it. They say this is a Case within the general Reason of the Common Law, for here is Malice, Falsity and Damage, and where they concur, there ought to be Remedy. And altho' this be a new Case, yet it ought not for that Reason to be rejected, for other kind of Actions have been newly introduc'd, and this is fit to be entertain'd as any.
 My Brothers that argued even now for the Action shew'd great Learning and great Pains, and certainly have said all that can be invented in support of this Case, but as far as I could perceive, they have spoken upon general Notions to that purpose I just now mention'd: but nothing that I could observe applicable to the Reasons and Differences I go upon.
 As for the Rule they go upon, that where Falsity, Malice and Damage do concur, there must be Remedy; I confess it is true generally, but not universally, for it holds not in the Case of a Judge, nor an Indictor, nor a Witness, nor of Words that import not legal Slander, tho' they are found to bring Damage, as I have shewn before. And the Reasons that exempt these Cases from the general Rule have the same force in the Case at Bar.
 I must confess the Judges have sometimes entertain'd new kinds of Actions, but it was upon great Deliberation, and with great Discretion, where a general Convenience requir'd it.
 If Slade's Case were new (for my Brother Thurland truly it was said in that Case, that there were infinite Numbers of Presidents) that Case imported the Common Course of Justice. Actions for Words that are said to be new, tho' they have been us'd some hundreds of years, are a necessary Means to preserve the Peace of the Kingdom. The Case of Smith and Craschaw, Cro. Car. 15. was a Case of general Concern, being that Prosecutions for Treasons may be against any Man and at any time.
 But in the Case at Bar, neither the Peace of the Kingdom nor the Course of Justice is concern'd in general, but only the Administration of Officers of the Parliament in the Execution of Parliamentary Writs, and can never happen but in time of Parliament, and must of Necessity fall under the Notice of the Parliament; so that if the Law were Deficient it is to be presum'd the Parliament wou'd take care to supply it: Discretion requires us rather to that, than to introduce new Presidents upon such general Notions that cannot govern the Course of Parliament.
 My Brother Atkyns said the Common-Law comply'd with the Genius of the Nation, I do not understand the Argument; Does the Common-Law change? Are we to Judge of the Changes of the Genius of the Nation? Whither may general Notions carry us at this Rate? For my own part I think, tho' the Common-Law be not Written, yet it is certain and not Arbitrary; We are Sworn to observe the Laws as they are, and I see not how we can Change them by our Judgments; and as for the Genius of the Nation, it will be best considered by the Parliament, who have Power of the Laws, and may bring us to a Complyance with it.
 In the Case at Bar I look upon the Sheriff as a particular Officer of the Parliament, for the managing Elections, and as if he were not Sheriff: I look upon the Writ as if it were an Order of Parliament, and had not the Name of a Writ; I look upon the Course of Parliament, which we pretend not to know, to be incident to the Consideration of it; so that it stands not upon the General Notion of Remedy in the common Course of Justice.
 The Arguments of the falling of the value of Money, whereby the Penalty of 100l. provided by the 23. H. 6. is become inconsiderable, and the increase of the Estimation of being a Member of Parliament, if they were true, are Arguments to the Parliament to change the Law by increasing the Penalty, but we cannot do it.
 My Brother Maynard in his Argument wou'd embolden us, telling us we are not to think the Case too hard for us, because of the Name of Course of Parliament, for Judges have punish'd Absentees: They may Determine what is a Parliament, what is an Act of Parliament, how long an Ordinance of Parliament shall continue, and may punish Tresspasses done in the very Parliament.
 I will not dispute the Truth of what he said in this, but if his Arguments were Artificial, he might have spared them; for they have no manner of effect to draw me beyond my Sphere.
 I will not be afraid to determine any thing that I think proper for to judge, but seeing I cannot find the Courts of Justice have at any time medled with Cases of this Nature, but upon express Power given them by Acts of Parliament, I cannot consent to this President, I am confident when there is need, the Parliament will discern it, and make Laws to enlarge our Power, so far as they shall think convenient.
 I see no harm that Sheriffs in the mean time should be safe from this new devis'd Action, which they call the Common Law; if they misdemean themselves, they are answerable to the Parliament, whose Officers they be, or may be punish'd by the Statute made for Regulating Elections.
 It is time for me to conclude: which I shall do by repeating the Opinion I at first deliver'd, (viz.) That this Judgment is not warranted by the Rules of Law; That it introduceth novelty of Dangerous Consequence, and therefore ought to be Revers'd.
 Saepe viatorem nova non vetas orbita fallit. Note, The Lord Chief Justice Vaughan and Lord Chief Baron Turner, both deceas'd, who in their Lives were Eminent Members of Parliament, were of the same Opinion; And the Judgment was accordingly Revers'd.
 FINIS. 
