THE SPEECH OF Mr. George Kelly. SPOKE At the Bar of the House of LORDS, ON Thursday, the 2d of May, 1723. IN His DEFENCE against the Bill then depending, For Inflicting Pains and Penalties upon Him. ------ Quamobrem à vobis, Judices, antè quàm de ipsa causa dicere incipio, hoc postulo. Primum id quod aequissimum est, ut ne quid huic praejudicati afferatis. Etenim non modo authoritatem, sed etiam nomen judicum amittemus, nisi hîc ex ipsis causis judicabimus, ac si ad causas, judicia jam facta domo, deferemus.Cic. pro Cluentio. ------  ------ LONDON: Printed for A. MOORE, near St. Paul's. MDCCXXIII. [Price One Shilling.]
  THE SPEECH OF Mr. George Kelly. My LORDS,
 SINCE my Council have so fully answered every Article alledged against me, it may seem unnecessary to take up Your Lordships Time, by saying any thing for my-self. And, indeed, it would be so, if my Charge were Ordinary or Particular. But, my Lords, I have been represented as a Person doubly guilty; First, In transacting Treason for my Self: and, Secondly, In doing it for other People.
 These are Crimes of the most heinous Nature; And if they were as clearly proved, as they have been strongly asserted, I should justly merit Your Lordships highest Displeasure, and all the Pains and Penalties that You could possibly inflict upon me.
 And since my Charge is so very Extraordinary: Since these Proceedings seem to be without any Precedent; and, That the Innocence of other Persons calls upon me for Publick Justice;
 I believe Your Lordships will easily allow, That to be silent, in such a Case! would be truly Criminal, and but too justly Censured.
 To enter into all the Particulars of my Accusation, would, I fear, take up more Time than is reasonable for me to ask, or for Your Lordships to allow: And though the many Inconsistencies, Contradictions, and false Conclusions which appear in almost every Page of the Printed Reports, plainly shew, The Weakness, Absurdity, and Sophistry of them; however, I shall only beg Leave to touch upon those material Parts, which relate to my-self, and my Defence to them. And the First Article which I find my-self charged with, is, The Employing of one Neyno to draw up Three Memorials to the Regent of France, to solicite Foreign Forces to invade this Kingdom.
 And for Proof of this, the Examinations of the same Person, which are neither upon Oath, nor so much as Signed by him (and whom the Committee of the Honourable House of Commons have represented as a very infamous Fellow) are the only Evidence assigned against me.
 This, my Lords, is the Crime! and This is the Proof!
 And though the bare mentioning of it, might be sufficient to convince Your Lordships of its Weakness; however, since so great a Weight has been laid upon this Kind of Evidence in another Place, it will be necessary to be a little more particular about it.
 The Two first of these Memorials (Viz. Those before and after the South-Sea Scheme) are but slightly mentioned: But the One pretended to be drawn up in December, 1721. (and containing a Demand of 5000 Men) and a Letter said to be written the March after (to amuse the Government into a false Security) are the chief Things upon which any Stress is laid.
 And, how False both these Allegations are, has, I don't doubt, evidently appeared to Your Lordships. For,
 Had my Accuser been really employed to draw up any such Memorials, it is reasonable to believe, that he would have kept Copies of some, and especially of the Last of them; since a Person who turned Informer so suddenly after, may very well be presumed to have had Thoughts of it for some Time before; and such Papers would, no doubt, give great Weight to his Information.
 But the Ministry have produced no such Copies; neither do they pretend to have them: Which is a very great Indication, that there never were any such Memorials at all.
 Besides, There are no Two of his Examinations of a Piece. Nay! he contradicts himself in almost every one of them. For,
 In his Second Examination, he says, That these Memorials were all drawn up by the Order of one Henry Watson (whom he really did not know, but took to be the late Earl Marishall) without making the least Mention of me.
 In his Third Examination, he says, They were delivered to me and Watson; And in his Fourth, he says again, They were all drawn up by the Order of Henry Watson Only. And, in a few Lines after, contradicts himself, and says, That the Heads of them were given to him by me and Watson: Which are such Inconsistencies, as (Your Lordships will easily grant) are not to be reconciled: And if his Memorials were no better drawn than his Examinations, I believe, they were not likely to meet with any great Success.
 As to the late Earl Marishall, how reasonable it is to believe, that a Person in his Circumstances should venture to come into England, and live so openly here, as to intrust himself, and a Secret of this Nature, to a Fellow, who (by his own Confession) did not know him, is humbly submitted to Your Lordships.
 And as for my Part, it is very plain, that I could have no Hand in them, since the Minutes in my Pocket-Book (in which I could have used no Disguise) agreeing with the concurrent Testimony of several Witnesses, plainly shew, That I was not in the Kingdom at the Times in which my Accuser pretends to have been so employed.
 For, by those Minutes, and their Testimony, it appears, That I went to France the 23d of November, 1721. and did not return 'till the latter End of the next Month; And my Accuser himself owns, in his First Examination, That he did not see me after my Return, 'till the January following; which makes it impossible, That he could have been so employed by me in December, since I was most part of that Month out of the Kingdom; and the few Days of it that I was here, he owns, he did not see me.
 Nor has the other Part of his Information relating to the Letter (which he pretends to have drawn up in March) better Grounds -- For, by the same Minutes, and by the same Evidence, it likewise appears, That I went to France the 22d of February after, and did not return 'till the middle of April, which makes it as impossible, that he could have been employed by me in March, since I was then likewise out of the Kingdom.
 Had this Examination been taken at any Distance of Time, it is possible he might be mistaken in it; but his first Information must have been about the middle of April, soon after my Return from France; For he confessed to the Person taken up with him at Deal. That he was the First who set the Ministry upon intercepting Letters. And the first Letters so intercepted, are owned, in the 42nd Page of the Report made to the Lower-House, to have been the 22d of April, 1722. -- And, surely, he cannot be supposed to have forgot so soon, what happened the very Month before; especially, since he has been so particular; as to name the very Day, (Saturday) upon which he says this Letter was so drawn up.
 By all which it plainly appears, That this Article is not only Groundless, but evidently False; and likewise, That he had no such Intimacy with me (as the Report pretends) since he has declared, That I never spoke to him of the Conspiracy; And that I could be a Month at one Time, and Two Months at another, out of Town, without his knowing any thing of it.
 As to what is said to his coming sometimes to my Lodgings, I believe it may be true; but it has been fully proved, That his Visits were never to me, but always to another Person, who lodged in the same House.
 And, I do solemnly affirm to your Lordships, That I never was acquainted with the late Earl Marishall, or with any such Person who went by the Name of Watson; That I knew very little of my Accuser; so little, That I am confident I never spoke to him Ten times in my Life; nor ever employed him in this or any other Affair whatsoever.
 The Second Article Charged upon me, is, The carrying on of a Treasonable Correspondence for the Bishop of Rochester. And, for Proof of this, The Examination of the same Person is the only Evidence produced against me, wherein he says, That I frequently told him, the Bishop was concerned in such a Correspondence; and that I managed it for him; with other Particulars not worth mentioning to your Lordships.
 How reasonable it is, that I should tell such a strange Untruth to a Person that I knew so very little of; and what Credit ought to be given to his bare Assertion, who has affirmed such Gross and Notorious Falsehoods in the former Article, must be submitted to your Lordships.
 And, in my present unhappy Situation, I cannot but think it a very great and singular Happiness, to have so Publick and Honourable an Occasion of purging myself from so vile a Calumny, and of doing Justice to that most Worthy and Learned Prelate.
 And I do solemnly declare to your Lordships, upon the Faith of a Christian, That I never wrote or received a Letter of any kind for the Bishop of Rochester, or was privy to any Correspondence of his at Home or Abroad: That I never shewed him any Letter that ever I wrote to France, or ever sent one there by his Privity or Direction: That I am very little known to his Lordship; went very rarely to wait upon him; so rarely! That I am confident few of his Servants know either my Name or Face; and have not seen him above Three or Four Times these Two Years past, and not above Eight or Ten Times in my whole Life.
 I do farther declare, That my Visits to his Lordship were always Publick; That I never went privately in a Chair to his House; always found other Company with him, who were generally Strangers to me; and never once mentioned his Name, upon this or any other Account, to the Person who has thus accused me. Which, with the Evidence that has been produced of his own Confessions to that Purpose, is, I hope, sufficient to convince your Lordships of the Truth of it.
 And as for the Dog, which has been brought as a Circumstance to prove this Matter, I do, in the same solemn Manner, declare, That he was given to me by a Surgeon at Paris (whose Affidavit has been offered to be produced) and who at that Time, I do verily believe, never heard of his Lordship's Name; And that he never was designed for any body but the Person I gave him to.
 And I appeal to the very Ministers themselves, if the British Resident at Paris, (who is constantly attended by that very Surgeon, and examined him about it) has not confirmed the Truth of this Account to them.
 I do farther affirm, That the Bishop of Rochester never saw him; Never received any Letter or Message by me, nor (do I believe) by any other Person about him: Neither did I ever know or hear, That his Lordship had any Intercourse or Correspondence with the late Earl of Mar, or any other disaffected Person Abroad.
 My LORDS,
 It cannot be imagined, that I have any particular Interest or Concern in this Matter; for I never received any Favours from his Lordship; neither do I owe him any Obligations, but those of Common Justice: And those I should perform, where I have so much Truth of my Side, to the greatest Enemy I have upon Earth.
 As for the other Circumstances which are brought to strengthen my Accuser's Examinations, and are set forth in one Pancier's Deposition. They will appear, I don't doubt, as Groundless and Inconsistent as the Examinations themselves.
 For, This Person swears, That another told him of this Conspiracy; That Six or Eight Battalions or Irish Forces were to come from Spain to assist the Conspirators. That 200,000l. were raised, and 800 Men regularly subsisted for this Purpose in London.
 These, My Lords, are called, in the 38th Page of the Report of the Lower House, The Concurrent and Corroborating Proofs of my Accuser's Examinations: And I humbly appeal to your Lordships, if any one of them carries the least Colour of Reason or Probability with it. For, can it be imagined, That such a Force should come from Spain, when there appears to be so strict a Friendship betwixt the Two Kingdoms? Or, That 200,000 l. could possibly be raised among all the Disaffected in England, in Case there was a License for it? Or, 800 Men regularly subsisted in this City, without a Discovery?
 These are such idle, inconsistent Tales, as (I am persuaded) can never have any Weight with your Lordships.
 Besides, my Lords, this is only bare Hear-say; And if the Hear-say of such Infamous Persons (or, indeed, of any Persons) be look'd upon as sufficient Evidence, I believe, no Man in England can be sure of his Life or Liberty an Hour, since any Two People may talk him into High-Treason whenever they please; and the greater the Person is, the greater his Danger always will be.
 The Third Crime which I stand charged with, is, The Writing of Three Treasonable Letters for the Bishop of Rochester supposed to be for the Pretender, the late Earl of Mar, and General Dillon, which Letters are said to have been sent by me to Mr. Gordon at Bologne, with Directions to be delivered to one Mr. Talbot.
 And, For Proof of this, the Clerks of the Post-Office are produced, who swear, That those Letters were (to the Best of their Knowledge)written in the same Hand with an Original which was stopt as a Specimen of it: Which Original has been sworn by Two Persons to be my Writing, and, consequently, those Letters must be so too.
 My LORDS, 
 These Letters are dated the 20th of April, and the Specimen so stopt, the 20th of August; Just Four Months after.
 And how it is possible for People (who receive such a Number of Letters) to swear to a Likeness of Hand, at such a Distance of Time; and what Weight ought to be laid upon this kind of Evidence; or upon that Modern and Mysterious one given by the Decypherers, in which they don't pretend to a Certainty themselves, must be submitted to your Lordships.
 And as to the Persons who have Sworn to my Hand, I hope it will be considered, That one of them is a Messenger, who never saw any of my Writing, but the Superscriptions of a few Letters, which (your Lordships may easily see) do not bear the least Likeness with what he has sworn to.
 Besides, this very Person was turned out of his Employment upon my Account, and a few Days after he gave this Evidence in the House of Commons, I saw a Paragraph in the News-Papers, that he was restored to it again. And as to the other, it is to be hoped, That it will be likewise considered, That he is a Servant, who attended me only about Three Weeks, and was turned off for an Infamous Action, which he has acknowledged himself to have been guilty of: Besides, he has confessed, That he never saw me write, but as he went backwards and forwards in the Room; and at such a Distance, as not to be able to distinguish one Character from another: And it has been proved by Two Witnesses, (on of which was a particular Friend of his own) That he declared, He never knew any thing of my Hand; but was Threatned by the Secretary of State into the Affidavit which has been Printed to that Purpose in the Appendix.
 And if that Paper had been my writing, it is impossible they could be reduced to a Necessity of making use of such improper Evidence, since no Pains have been spared to procure better; since Numbers of People have been taken up, confined, and examined to this very Point; and Newgate sent to, more than once, for Witnesses to it.
 And though it might be proved by the very Report of the Lower House, That those Letters could not have come from the Bishop of Rochester; however, my Business is only to convince Your Lordships, That I was not the Writer of them, and of this, I believe, it is impossible to give clearer Proofs than I have done: For if those Letters had been dictated to me the Twentieth of April (as the Report pretends) it must have been at his Lordship's House in the Country; since it appears by the Deposition of his Coachman, that he went there the 12th of that Month, and did not leave it till the 5th of May.
 But it has been proved, that I was in London ALL that Time; and if it had been permitted, there is not a Person in the Bishop's Family, but would testify, That I was not then at his House in the Country; and, consequently, could not have written any such Letters for him.
 Besides, I have brought several Persons of Credit and undoubted Characters, who have all testified, That the Hand in which those Letters are said to be written, is not mine, nor any thing like it.
 An Affidavit has been produced from Mr. Gordon, that he never received any such Letters from me, nor ever had any Correspondence, or even an Acquaintance with me.
 And it has been likewise proved, That Mr. Talbot, to whom those Letters are said to be delivered by Mr. Gordon, was in this Town the very Day upon which they are said to have been delivered to him at Bologne: And if I had any such Letters to transmit, can it be imagined, that I would trust them to the CommonPost, when I had so good an Opportunity to send them by, or direct them to Bologne, when the same Post might as well have carried them to Paris.
 These are such full, such evident Proofs, as, I hope, cannot fail of giving Your Lordships the utmost Conviction in this Matter; and, consequently, that this Article is, like the rest, both Groundless and manifestly False.
 But, if any Credit is to be given to the Confessions which my Accuser made to the Person taken up with him, it is very plain, that those Letters must have come from another Quarter; and, to say no worse, were at least calculated to carry on his own base and villainous Designs. For it has been proved to your Lordships, that he Confessed to have been employed by one of the Ministers, received 300l. from him, and was to have 2000l. more.
 That this Minister declared a Personal Prejudice, upon some private Account, to the Bishop of Rochester; was resolved to pull down the Pride of that Haughty Prelate, and to squeeze me (as I think the Expressions were) to that Purpose.
 My Lords,
 I say, if any Credit is to be given to this Confessions, there can be no great Difficulty in tracing out the Source of this Part of the Conspiracy; and I am heartily sorry to say, That there are some Circumstances which seem to give but too great a Countenance to the Truth of it.
 For, my Lords, He made this Confession at a Juncture when he may very well be supposed, to have spoken in the Sincerity of his heart; when he saw his Villainy detected; believed himself to be in the greatest Danger, and depended upon the Person's Assistance (to whom he made it) to help him out of his Misfortunes. -- And how particular this Prosecution; is, and how sufficiently I have been Squeezed, are Things but too visible, and too well known to the World.
 Besides, the very Cypher by which those Letters were written, (and which he owned to have received from that Minister) was actually caught upon the Person to whom he gave it; and he confessed, That he put a Paper of Directions into one of my Drawers, by which (the Report says) most of the Treasonable Letters were Addressed.
 And it has been proved to Your Lordships, That those Drawers were constantly open, and that he made some Pretext for being alone in my Lodgings, the very Night before I was first taken up.
 And since he was the first that set the Ministry upon Intercepting Letters, which he said were mine; it is very extraordinary, that such a material Part of his Evidence should be omitted in his Examination; or, that the very first Letters so intercepted, should be those alledged against the Bishop of Rochester: And if the Originals of those Three Letters were stopt, I don't at all doubt, but they might be proved to be my Accuser's own Hand-writing.
 And how strong a Sense he had of his Guilt, by attempting an Escape, which proved fatal to him, and how visibly the Hand of God has interposed in that Eminent Prelate's Favour, by taking one of the Persons (designed for his Destruction) out of the World, and giving the other Grace and Virtue enough to withstand all Temptations to his Prejudice, are Things highly worthy of Your Lordships just and most serious Consideration, and no small Indication of his Innocence.
 And as to the Money which my Accuser owned to have received; That there was a very sudden and extraordinary Change in his Condition; That, from the lowest State of Poverty and Want, he soon arrived to that of a Vicious and most Profligate Affluence, is a Truth sufficiently known to all those that were acquainted with him.
 But from whence this Change proceeded, or what real Grounds he had for aspersing that Honourable Person, I will not pretend to say: But if those Aspersions be false (as I wish they may) it may be justly inferred, That a Fellow who was capable of vilifying one Person, may very well be judged as capable of doing so to another: And if his Veracity is not to hold good in one Case, there can be no Reason for allowing it in the other. The Fourth Crime alledged against me, is, A Number of intercepted Letters, supposed to be written to and received from the late Earl of Mar, General Dillon and other Disaffected Persons Abroad.
 And for Proof of this, A Frenchman has been produced, who swears, That he once saw me take up a Letter at Burton's Coffee-house, by the Name of Baker, which Name (it is said) some of the Treasonable Letters were addressed by; and was, in a Paper of Directions, found in my Lodgings. -- How that Paper came there, has been already proved to Your Lordships.
 And as to the Person who has swore to this Particular, I must observe, That when he gave this Evidence to the House of Commons, he did not know me, tho' he spoke to me, and look'd several times earnestly at me; and for the Truth of this, I can appeal to most of the Members of that Honourable House, who were Witnesses of it: And he would still have probably continued in his Ignorance, if some private Hints, (as I have been told) were not given him, or the same Method taken which has been done with a Number of other strange Fellows, who were frequently sent to the Tower, and had no other Business but to take a View of me.
 Besides, the People of the Coffee-house have testified the contrary, and that no such Letter ever came to their House. And tho' it be set down in my Examination before the Council, that I confessed to have taken up such a Letter, I humbly appeal to my Lord Chancellor (if it can be worth his Lordship's While to recollect it) If he did not ask me that very Question two or three times? And if I did not as often deny it? Neither is this the only Particular that is falsely set down in that Examination. And I do solemnly affirm to Your Lordships, That I never did receive any such Letter, nor ever saw that Paper of Directions, 'till it was Printed in the Report.
 And there is one Circumstance pretty Remarkable in this Correspondence, That as it began with my Accuser's Information, so it ended with his being taken up. For immediately after a new Correspondence is pretended to be discovered; and to fix this likewise upon me, it has been suggested, that I sent Cyphers by Sir Harry Goring to France, and had Letters directed by them to Sturgess's and Slaughter's Coffee-house.
 But, my Lords, no such Cyphers were found in my Custody, nor any Papers relating to such a Correspondence, and the People of those Coffee-houses have all sworn, That I never Ordered any Letters of that kind to be taken in, or received one, either by my own or any other Name from them. Nay! one of them has sworn, That no such Letters ever came to his House at all; and the other says, That a Messenger from the Secretary's Office, was the only Person that ever called at his House for those directed to it.
 And as to the Printed Examination of one Mr. Caryl, to this Purpose, it were to be wished, That this Gentleman's Reasons had been published, as well as his Accusation.
 For I am confident, he will not pretend to say, That ever he saw me write a Line in his Life, or give a Piece of Paper of any kind to Sir Harry Goring; and what Reason he could have for believing that we settled a Key for such a Correspondence, is very extraordinary: Nor have the other Particulars which he has affirmed, the least Foundation of Truth; For I do solemnly aveir to your Lordships, That I never saw Sample in my Life, or gave Captain Bonin any such Letter of Recommendation: Neither had I ever the Honour of speaking to my Lord North and Grey, or of being any ways known to his Lordship; and that I should mention him so familiarly by the fictitious Name of Johnson, (and which, of all Names, I should never make use of in that manner) will, I hope, appear very incredible to Your Lordships; especially since Mr. Caryl himself has furnished so good a Reason for the Disbelief of it. For he has likewise affirmed, That my Examination before the Council was read at Doctor Yalden's House: The Doctor has indeed already done me Justice in that Point; and Mr. Tucker (who was all the while in Company) will, I am very sure, do the same.
 And since Mr. Caryl appears to be so plainly mistaken in this Particular, surely he may very well be supposed to be so in all the rest, especially since he has not assigned the least Reason for any of 'em.
 As to the rest of the intercepted Letters, the People of the several Coffee-houses have likewise cleared me from them; and all testify, That they never delivered me any such Letters, or received any Directions from me about them; which, I hope, will be sufficient to convince Your Lordships, That I was not concerned in any such Correspondence, especially since no Letters of this kind were found in my Possession, nor any other Papers relating to the Conspiracy.
 There are two other Crimes, in which I most humbly crave Your Lordships Patience to be heard, because they are the blackest that can be imagined, and seem to be Personal.
 The First, is a Letter directed to Mr. Gordon at Bologne, with two Affidavits, which have been Printed, and are suggested to be sent by my Directions, in order to have him and one Birmingham perjure themselves upon my Account: -- For in this Letter it is said, That the Inclosed is a Copy of a Note from the Person concerned, with what he thinks requisite.
 My Lords,
 This Letter is dated the 20th of March, at which Time, and for Five Months before, I never was allowed the Use of Pen, Ink, or Paper, or the Liberty of seeing any Person that could possibly have conveyed such a Note for me; for I have been guarded in a different Manner from other People in the Tower: My Warders were put into the very Room with me, and ordered never to stir a Moment, Night or Day, out of it; which Orders they punctually obeyed, and were constant Witnesses to all my Actions.
 And those Warders will depose, That, they believe, it was impossible for me to have written or sent out any such Directions; and the Officers, I don't doubt, will do me the same Justice.
 And when my Solicitor was admitted, finding that Mr. Gordon's Affidavit might be of use, if allowed as Evidence, a Person was immediately dispatched, and who brought it in a different Form from those which have been Printed. And my Solicitor can testify, That no Draughts were sent by him; which, with the gross Management of the Persons concerned in this Affair, is, I hope, sufficient to give your Lordships the clearest Conviction of my Innocence in it. And I do solemnly affirm, That I never knew any Thing of them; never heard of the Name of Akenhead before; nor can I find out any Person (besides the Master of that Vessel) that ever did. The other Crime is set forth in one Levett's Deposition in the Report made to this most Honourable House: Wherein (among a great many other most notorious Falsehoods) she swears, That one Mrs. Barnes told her, That I was instrumental in, or privy to the shutting up of a Person in a Dungeon, for Fear of his turning Informer; and not only of him, but of 200 more upon the same Account. Which, I believe, is the most surprizing Crime that ever yet was alledged against any Christian.
 Mrs. Barnes denies every Syllable of this Conversation; and if the Person that swears this against her, had been produced, she would be proved to your Lordships, to have been a vile infamous Creature all her Life. And if she is to be believed, or that your Lordships can think it possible there can be the least Truth in her Deposition, it will be a Sin to let me live, and impossible to find out a Punishment too Cruel for me.
 These, my Lords, are the Chief Crimes which I am charged with; and very great ones they are, had they been in any Degree made out against me.
 I am a Stranger to the Methods of Legal Proof, but have been told by my Council, That the greater a Person's Crime is, the clearer the Evidence ought to be against him; and how weak and insufficient the Proofs produced for this Purpose are, and how clear and convincing those which have been offered in my Justification, has, I hope, evidently appeared to your Lordships, and given you intire Conviction of my Innocence; and that all the Crimes alledged against me, are without the least Colour or Foundation of Truth.
 But how much I have suffered for these supposed Crimes; and what extraordinary Means have been made use of against me, are Things much worthier of your Lordships Judicial Consideration.
 To be taken up and held to exorbitant Bail, without ever assigning any particular Crime against me; To suffer a Long and Close Confinement, where the Expence bears no Proportion to my Circumstance:
 To have Numbers of People, and some of them, Creatures of the meanest Rank and Condition, taken up, examined, and tampered with upon my Account; and Newgate sent to for Witnesses:
 To have a Servant (who was turned off for his Ill-Behaviour) brought as an Evidence; and my most intimate Friends Imprisoned for not swearing against me; Are Hardships and Proceedings, I believe, hitherto unheard-of in England; and such as, I hope, your Lordships will, in your great Wisdom and Justice, think fit to redress. All which is of a Piece with an infamous Offer made to myself by one of the Under-Secretaries of State, who, the Morning after I was first examined, came to me with a Message (as he said) from one of his Superiors, to let me know, That I had now a very good Opportunity of serving myself; and that he was sent to offer me my own Conditions.
 And when I declared myself an intire Stranger to the Conspiracy, and was sorry to find that Noble Lord have so base an Opinion of me, he seemed to wonder, that I would neglect so good an Occasion of serving myself, especially when I might have any Thing I pleased to ask for.
 What Authority that Person had for this Message, or the rest of his AfterProceedings, I will not pretend to say: But as I have been Ruined and utterly Undone by them, I hope your Lordships will take my Sufferings, as well as Circumstances, into Your Consideration; and, instead of Inflicting any farther Pains or Penalties, look upon me (as I really am) a Person highly Injured, and not a Criminal concerned in any Transactions against the Government.
 As for my Circumstances, they are but too well known in the World.
 And here I cannot omit my Gratitude to the late and present Constables of the Tower; for the late Constable (though I never had the Honour to see his Lordship) was, upon a Representation of my Circumstances, so very good, as to procure me the Promise of an Allowance from the Government; and his Lordship, the present, has been so kind as to get it paid: But the Officers of the Place can testify, That this Allowance has not been converted to any Private Use of mine, but constantly given to the Persons appointed to attend me. And I must take Leave to assure your Lordships, That it has cost me more since I was sent there, than the Government have now left me really worth in the World; and I must suddenly become a Sacrifice to my Necessities, if not set at Liberty by your Lordships great Clemency and Compassion.
 If I have dropped any Expressions which may not be so agreeable to some particular Persons in Power, I could wish that my Defence had not laid me under that Necessity: And I do solemnly protest, That they have not proceeded from any Resentment for my Sufferings; but from a Sincere Endeavour to give your Lordships the clearest Conviction of my Innocence. And since I could not merit their Favour, I shall always endeavour to preserve their good Opinion.
 As to the Legality of these Proceedings, and the Danger of making Precedents of this Kind, those are Things which have been already fully set forth by my Council, and must be submitted to the great Wisdom and Jurisdiction of this most illustrious Assembly: An Assembly! which is not only the Highest and most Honourable, but the Uprightest and most Impartial, I believe, upon Earth; and whose Justice has ever appeared as extensive as their Power.
 The great, and, indeed, the only Argument which I have heard offered for the passing of this Bill, is, That the Occasion is Extraordinary; That your Lordships are in your Legislative Capacity; and though the Proofs may not be so legal, however, In Terrorem, it is necessary to pass it.
 But I humbly beseech your Lordships to consider, Where the Extraordinariness of this Occasion lies? -- Has there been the least Commotion in my Part of the Three Kingdoms? Or any Person injured in his Liberty or Fortune, besides those who have been so unhappy as to fall under this Suspicion?
 Or, Is this Occasion more Extraordinary than when there was a Publick Insurrection in the Kingdom? And when the Persons concerned in it, were tried by the Common and Ordinary Courts of Justice? And because your Lordships are vested with a Supreme Authority, and not tied up to the Common Forms of Law, can that be a Reason for your acting directly contrary to it? And to suppose your Lordships capable of doing so, was not, I must say, so becoming an Argument to have been offered upon this Occasion.
 And to have a Session, which opened with so mild, so gracious a Speech from the Throne, end in such an extraordinary Manner, must surely be very contrary to the Design and Intention of the Throne at that Time; and is, I hope, so still; especially, since no intervening Accidents have happened to ruffle the Quiet and Tranquility of the Kingdom.
 My Lords,
 The First extraordinary Bill that, I believe, ever passed in England was that of the Earl of Strafford; and how much Personal Prejudice was in his Prosecution, and how fatal that Bill proved in its Consequences, I need not mention, since the Royal Martyr himself has, in his dying Words, called it, An unjust Sentence, and imputed all his Misfortunes to it. And,
 Pray, my Lords, why was that Sentence Unjust, but because it was not supported by Law? -- And, to the Eternal Honour of this House be it said, That when the Proofs upon his Tryal were not found Legal, They refused to find him Guilty.
 But when this Extraordinary Method was taken, and the Torrent of the Times bore down their usual Justice, then the Flood-Gates of all those Miseries were opened, which overwhelmed and sunk the Constitution: And of which, some of Your Noble Predecessors had so strong and lively a Sense, as to declare, in this very House, That they would be sooner torn in Pieces, than come into such Illegal Proceedings; And so fell a Sacrifice to the Love and Laws of their Country.
 To which I shall only beg Leave to add One Observation, that, I am sure, is but too well known to that Right Reverend Bench: -- "That of all the Prelates who advised his Majesty to the Passing of that Fatal Bill, not One of them escaped the Violence of those very Persons whom they endeavour'd to oblige by that Advice.
 These, my Lords, were the Unhappy Effects and Fatal Consequences of One Extraordinary Bill: And what those of Another may prove, the Great Director of All Things only can foresee!
 Many are the Arguments which might be brought to shew the great Injustice, as well as Inconveniencies of these Laws in particular: But as my Liberty can be of no great Moment to the World, I shall only beseech Your Lordships, Not through me, to give a Wound to the Constitution, which, perhaps, may not so easily be cured.
 The great Characteristick which distinguishes England from the rest of the Neighbouring Nations, is, the Excellency of her Laws, of which Your Lordships are the Great Guardians: And if you suffer those Laws to be broke in upon, and render Life or Liberty so precarious, as to be affected or taken away, by every idle Hearsay, that Excellency must soon disappear, and the Best Form of Government now upon Earth, consequently, sink into Anarchy and Confusion.
 My LORDS,
 The Words of my Bill are very severe, and do not bear the least Proportion to the Proofs which have been produced against me: And I humbly hope, That my pass'd Sufferings will be look'd upon as a sufficient Punishment; especially, since it is not pretended, that I have transgressed any Law yet in Being.
 I propose no great Happiness in this Life, and would willingly avoid as much Misery as I could; And must therefore humbly beseech Your Lordships, To look upon me as a Stranger in Your Kingdom, and a Person (as I really am) Inconsiderable in my-self; and, consequently, incapable of doing the least Prejudice to any Government.
 For my Behaviour, I am willing to give the Best Sureties that I am able: But if that be not approved of, I hope Your Lordships will give me Leave to retire to some other Part of the World, where I may enjoy my Poverty with Freedom.
 But, let my Fate be what it will, I shall ever pray for Your Lordships Particular Welfare, as well as the General Prosperity of the Kingdom.
 And so resign my-self, with the utmost Humility, to Your Lordships great Clemency, Justice, and Compassion.
 FINIS. 
