 Picture of garden THE CITY GARDENER. Containing the most Experienced METHOD OF Cultivating and Ordering such Ever-greens, Fruit-Trees, flowering Shrubs, Flowers, Exotick Plants, &c. as will be Ornamental, and thrive best in the LONDON GARDENS. ------ By Thomas Fairchild, Gardener of Hoxton. ------ ------ LONDON: Printed for T. Woodward, at the Half-Moon against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street, and J. Peele, at Locke's Head in Pater-noster Row. M.DCC.XXII. (Price One Shilling.)
 To the Honourable and Worshipful The GOVERNORS Of the Hospitals of BETHLEM AND BRIDEWELL, THESE PAPERS, For the Improvement of the London GARDENS, Are most humbly Presented and Dedicated by Their most Obedient Humble Servant, Tho. Fairchild.
  THE City GARDENER.  Introduction. I HAVE upwards of thirty Years been placed near London, on a Spot of Ground, where I have raised several thousand Plants, both from foreign Countries, and of the English Growth; and in that Time, and from the Observations I have made in the London Practice of Gardening, I find that every thing will not prosper in London; either because the Smoke of the Sea-Coal does hurt to some Plants, or else because those People, who have little Gardens in London, do not know how to manage their Plants when they have got them: And yet I find, that almost every Body, whose Business requires them to be constantly in Town, will have something of a Garden at any rate. I have been therefore advised to give my Thoughts in this Manner, that every one in London, or other Cities, where much Sea-Coal is burnt, may delight themselves in Gardening, tho' they have never so little Room, and prepare their Understanding to enjoy the Country, when their Trade and Industry has given them Riches enough to retire from Business. 
The Books I have read, and the Conversation I have had with a great Number of the Trading Part of Mankind, inform me, that all the Care, Labour, and Industry of Men of Business tend to lead them in their latter Days into Quiet and Ease, as well as to provide Fortunes for their Families. And I have lived to see some, who, from very small Beginings, both in Fortune and Opportunity of Gardening, have work'd themselves so well through the World, that they are now Possessors of large Estates, and many Acres disposed after the best Manner; which I think will not be amiss to mention, for the Encouragement of such who are now for the Sake of Trade pinn'd down to a narrow Compass of Gardening; true Care and Industry will make their Gardens larger, as the same Care will increase their Fortunes.
 One may guess at the general Love my Fellow-Citizens have for Gardening, in the midst of their Toil and Labour, by observing how much Use they make of every favourable Glance of the Sun to come abroad, and of their furnishing their Rooms or Chambers with Basons of Flowers and Bough-pots, rather than not have something of a Garden before them. Nor is this Pleasure less cultivated among Persons of Quality, while publick Affairs oblige them to the Town, during the busy Days of the Week; I have heard some say, that the Sight of good Flowers, and their grateful Smell, has made them often wish to be enjoying the Pleasures of their Country Gardens. And so I find, that the Men of Business are all upon the same Foot in seeking Country Pleasures. We may consider that then our judicious Traders in the City have as much Reason to hope for the Enjoyment of the Pleasures of this Life, as the Persons of Quality, which are in the highest Stations; for the Pleasures of Gardening, or Country Air, which I speak of, are equally the Right of one and the other. Now, when Gardening goes so far among Men in general, as to engage the Minds of the most worthy Part of Mankind, or I might say of all Men who have the least Time for Diversion; I see no Reason why I should not cultivate this innocent Pleasure among my Fellow-Citizens; that from the highest to the lowest, every one may be improving their Talent, or even their Mite, in the best Way they can, in order to increase their Quiet of Mind, to be fix'd in a right Notion of Country Happiness, when their Affairs will permit them to reach such Pleasures.
 When we are not yet arrived at the Pleasures of a large Garden, or cannot enjoy the Benefit of a large Piece of Ground, we content our selves with a Nosegay, rather than fail. 
There is, I confess, a very wide Difference; but where a little is only to be had, we should be content with a little; Industry will always find out more: 'Tis Money will be the Consequence of Industry, and that will always go for its full Value, and bring us as many Acres as it's worth; and in Proportion to the Money Men get, so may their Gardens be larger and better garnish'd. And if their Riches does not too much engage their Mind, they may have Content too; for whoever understands, and loves a Garden, may have Content if he will, because he has Opportunity every Day of contemplating the Works of the Creation, and of admiring the Power and Wisdom of the Creator; which I think is the greatest Happiness.
 I think I need say no more of the Book I am now publishing; my Design is only to instruct the Inhabitants of the City, how they may in little arrive at the Knowledge of managing and delighting in those Gardens, which their present Industry leads them to retire to, when their Business has given them sufficient Fortunes to leave off Trade; and I doubt not but, from my Experience, I may add some Benefit to those who have already began to shew their Love for Gardening, even in the smallest Way, let it be never so little.
 ------ ------ Chap. I Of Squares, and large open Places in London and Westminster: The Plants proper to adorn them. SOME Gentlemen, who have been abroad, have told me, that there is no publick Place for Walking in any City on this side Italy, that is so pleasant as St. James's Park. The Gardens belonging to the French King at Paris, are not near it in Beauty, as I am inform'd. The Park at St. James's is of a large Extent, and disposed in handsome Walks of Lime-Trees and Elms, a large regular Canal, a Decoy for Ducks. And altho' it is as much oppress'd with the London Smoke, as almost any of our great Squares; yet the wild Fowl, such as Ducks and Geese, are conformable to it, and breed there; and there is an agreeable Beauty in the Whole, which is wanting in many Country Places. The Quantity of Ground, which now lies in a manner waste in Moorfields, might undoubtly be render'd very agreeable, was it to be adorn'd after the same manner, and be as delightful to the Citizens, as St. James's Park is to the Courtiers. 
The Space of Ground is indeed large and open to the Country on one Side; but then when the other Sides are encompass'd with Sea-Coal Smoke, some would imagine there can be very little Hopes of a Country Prospect in such a Place. Nay, this Smoke prevails so far, that half a Mile nearer the open Country, it is sensibly felt; and yet not only Elms, Limes, and Beech-Trees grow there, but the most ungovernable Sorts of wild Fowl make it the Place of their Resort.
 The Duke of Buckingham's Gardens, the Lord Godolphin's, the Duke of Marlborough's, the Royal Gardens, and others which bring good Fruit and Flowers, are joining to this Park; the common Birds of the Woods are familiar in these Gardens, as well as the Park. And since this is plainly Matter of Fact, why may we not in many Places, that are airy in the Body of London, make such Gardens as may be dress'd in a Country manner? There is St. James's Square, Lincoln's-Inn Fields, and Bloomsbury Square, besides others, which might be brought into delightful Gardens.
 The plain way of laying out Squares in Grass Platts and Gravel Walks, does not sufficiently give our Thoughts an Opportunity of Country Amusements; I think some sort of Wilderness-Work will do much better, and divert the Gentry better than looking out of their Windows upon an open Figure; for which Reason I shall explain what my Opinion is about such Squares very particularly.
 In the first place; If a Square was planted in the Manner of a Wilderness, it would be a Harbour for Birds. 2dly, The Variety of Trees would be delightful to the Eye. 3dly, Groves and Wildernesses would be new and pleasant in a London Prospect. 4thly, The Walks, tho' regular as the Walks in the common Squares, would be more shady and more private, and the Hedges and the Groves of Trees in every Quarter would hide the Prospect of the Houses from us; every House would command the Prospect of the Whole, as well as if it was lay'd out in plain Grass Platts and Walks. And, 5thly, Every Fountain made in such Places, would have double the Beauty it would have in plain Squares, as is now the Fashion; and notwithstanding what may be objected to Fountains in this Wilderness-Work, that a Fountain cannot be discover'd in the Prospect of every House; I say, that it may be done with Ease, to make it appear or shew it self as well to one House as another, as my Draught will shew. But the Draught I give may be varied by those who make or fit up such Squares. I place it here only as a small Example of what may be done; I am very sensible it may be very much improved.
 Now when we have fix'd upon a Draught or Design for a Square, we must consider what will grow in it, or else our Labour will be lost; and especially how to make it look well in the Winter, and that Part of the Spring, when Persons of Distinction are in Town, or else the main Foundation of the Design will be lost; for they will not pay for a Thing that they have no Benefit of, or Pleasure in.
 Therefore, first, I shall mention what Sorts of Ever-greens will grow in London, as I have found by my own Experience; tho' 'tis to be consider'd, that the Plants that will grow in a Square or large Place, will not always grow in a Street or a Court. But that I shall explain more fully by and by.
 First, The common green Holly will grow very well, and last a long time, and of the variegated Kinds, the Bleach and Ecles's Holly will do the best. Secondly, The Ivy will thrive very well, and afford an agreeable Green all the Winter. Thirdly, The English Box will grow well, and be very ornamental. Fourthly, The Italian Ever-green Privet will thrive well. Fifthly, The Ilex or Ever-green Oak will grow, and make an handsome Appearance. And, Sixthly, The Laurus or common Bay will live and be prosperous, and make a very good Show; but the Laurel, Philirea, Alaternus, and others of our hardy Greens, will not do so well in London. These six Sorts will afford good Variety, and dress out a Garden for Winter very well; but for the Sake of the Spring, when the Company is generally in Town, we should intermix with them some Flowers, Shrubs, and such Trees as will yield a Beauty in their tender opening Buds; and these are many in Number.
 The flowering Shrubs are, First, The Lilac, either with the white, blue, or purple Flower, will thrive very well, and blossom very freely in London, especially in open Places. Secondly, The Laburnum will grow very well, and flower plentifully, making a beautiful Appearance with its Strings of yellow Flowers. Thirdly, The Spanish Broom will likewise do very well, and make a good Show with its Spikes of yellow Blossoms. Fourthly, The Scorpion, bladder Senna, and Citissus 2 Clutis will make a good Show with their yellow Flowers; as one may observe in some little Courts or Gardens in Lincoln's-Inn Fields. Fifthly, the common white Jessamin is a Plant which grows and blossoms very freely in London. Sixthly, The gilder Rose, for a Mixture with the others, may do very well. Seventhly, The Province Rose, white and red, will grow in London; but no other Sort of Rose will stand in the City Gardens, since the Use of Sea-Coal; tho' I am inform'd that they grew very well in London, when the Londoners burnt Wood. Eighthly, The Passion-Tree will thrive well, and bear Blossoms, without the Trouble of housing it. Ninthly, I am told the Syringe grew very well in Soho-Square; and also the Althea-frutex has blossom'd well in London. Tenthly, Apples will blossom very freely in the open Parts of London, and make a beautiful Show as any of the flowering Shrubs; but they seldom bear Fruit, unless they are grassed upon Paradise Stocks. Eleventhly, Pears thrive very well in London; and besides the fine Show they make when they are in Flower, they will bear very good Fruit, as may be observ'd in very close Places, and confined Allies about Barbican, and other Parts about Aldersgate-street, Bishopsgate street, &c. To these we may add the Vine, which will do very well in London, either against Walls, or without them. In Leicester-Fields, there is a Vine that bears good Grapes every Year; and in many close Places, such as Tavern Yards, there are Vines now growing in good Perfection, and even bear good Fruit; so that we might distribute them among the Plants in the Wilderness Quarters.
 The Virginian Accacia makes a good Figure, and a large Tree. There was one of them growing in the close Passage between the New and Old Palace yard Westminster, about two or three Years ago, and I suppose it may be still growing there; and there is some now growing at Russel House in Bloomsbury Square.
 We have Instances enough of the Elm, that it will do well in London, from the large Trees now growing in the Temple, and several other Inns of Court.
 All the Squares which are already made, are Proofs that the Lime-Tree will bear the London Smoke, and will grow even in the closest Places; as in little Courts and Yards belonging to Taverns, tho' in the Heart of the City.
 The Mulberry likewise thrives very well in London, in very close Places, either in the Ground or in Tubs.
 Figgs prosper extremely in the City, and the Smoke has no ill Effect upon them. The Reverend Dr. Bennet has some of them in his Garden at Cripplegate; which, by the new Way of Pruning, are well set for Fruit; and I question not but they will ripen very well; for Figgs have brought their Fruit to Perfection in much closer Places than the Doctor's Garden. Figgs have ripen'd very well in the Roll's Gardens in ChanceryLane. 
The White Thorn will likewise grow very well in the City. I believe the highest Tree of the Kind in England, is now growing in London, in a close Alley leading from Whitecross-street towards Bunhill Fields. And as this Sort of Plant is very early in its Shoots, it will make a pretty early Ornament in Squares. There are good Hedges of this Plant in the Charter-house Gardens, altho' surrounded with Houses.
 The Platanus, or Plane-Tree, likewise will do very well; and from the Largeness of its Leaf, will make a fine Figure. There are Trees of them now in the Church-yard at St. Dunstan's in the East, above forty Foot high, which bear ripe Fruit, even so good as to produce young Plants.
 The Horse Chesnut will likewise make a fine Appearance, with its beautiful Spikes of Flowers; and it gives an excellent Shade, and grows very quick. We have an Instance of this in the Master of the Temple's Garden, where there is little or no Sun.
 The Morello Cherry will live and thrive very well in London; and not only blossom, but bring Fruit to Perfection, in the most airy Parts of the City.
 The Almond should by no means be forgot, for its great Beauty, when it is in Flower, which comes very early in the Spring. 'Twill make a fine Appearance, and prosper very well in the open Parts of the City.
 The Curran also will grow very well in London, and will help to fill the Wilderness-Work of Squares.
 There is no Honey-suckle that will grow in the City, but one Sort, which comes from Archangel, which we call the Russian Honey-suckle, and will thrive very well in London, as I have experienced.
 I am almost perswaded, that the OliveTree would grow well in London; and I am credibly inform'd, that in the City of Exeter, Oranges and Myrtles grow there in the Gardens without Shelter; and the Firing of that City is chiefly Sea-Coal: But I shall have Occasion of saying something more on this Head in another Chapter.
 The Mezereon will likewise do very well; they thrive now in the Gardens at Bridewell.
 Of Flowers that will grow well in London fit for the adorning of Squares. FOR the Edging of Borders in Squares, the Plant call'd Thrift, or Sea-Gillyflower, has been generally used, and with good Success. There are two or three Sorts of it; but the best is that which is call'd the Scarlet-Thrift. The Plant has Leaves like Grass, which grow in large Tufts, and in the flowering Season makes a very good Show, the whole Plant then being cover'd with Flowers. This Plant will last a good while, and is the best binding Edging you can use in London.
 In the Borders within this Edging, there will be room for several Sorts of Flowers, besides Annuals; and those are chiefly
 Lillies, which if they are of the white flowering Kind, will make a good Show in the Winter; for their Leaves are above Ground all that Time, and look very pleasant to the Eye; but for the Sake of Variety, at the flowering Season, let them be intermix'd with the Orange-Lilly, and five Sorts of Martagons, which makes a fine Show. But the Leaves of this last Sort does not appear above Ground till about March.
 There are striped Sorts of both these, which are much admired. For without flowering, they have as fine an Appearance as most Flowers that grow; the yellow and green Stripes of their Leaves are so gay. There is another Sort besides, which I have lately purchas'd from abroad, that has its Flower striped in scarlet and white, which blossoms very well, and is very beautiful.
 The Perennial Sun-flower is also another Plant that will thrive very well in the City Gardens, and will make a good Show in the Summer with its large yellow Flowers; and this blows higher than the Lillies, commonly about four or five Foot.
 The Sweet-William will also grow very well. They make a very good Appearance, and last in Flower a great while. There are the white, the striped red and white, and the deep red flowering Kinds. These blow about a Foot high.
 The Primrose-Tree is a Plant that makes a good Show, and will grow well in London. Its Flower-stalks will sometimes be near three Foot high, garnish'd from Top to Bottom with large yellow Flowers.
 In the next Place, we should have Regard to the Asters or Starworts, and especially the Italian Sort, whose Flowers are of a fine purple Colour, and blossoms in Autumn. The Virginia Sort is also a fair Flower, and makes a fine Show: And there is another Sort which flowers in October, and is call'd the October Flower, that also makes a good Appearance, and should be cultivated in London more than it is at present.
 The Lillies are, the White Lilly, the early Roman-Lilly, the Fiery or Flaming Lilly, and the Orange-Lilly.
 The Martagons are, the Common, the Pompony Martagon, the Imperial Martagon, White Martagon, the Scarlet Martagon.
 The Pompony Martagon is so great a Flower, that I have seen near threescore Blossoms upon one Stalk.
 The scarlet Lychness, both double and single, will stand well in London, and may be best planted in the Spring; but all the Sorts of Lillies and Martagons should be planted in Autumn.
 The Campanula and Canterbury Bell does very well, and Holy Oak will make a good Figure in the Squares and open Places.
 The French Honey-suckle will make a very beautiful Appearance, yielding fine Spikes of Flowers of a deep Peach-bloom Colour.
 Also the Dwarf-flag Iris comes very early with its bright blue Flowers, and makes as good an Appearance as any Flower I have yet mentioned.
 The Day-Lilly likewise grows very well even in close Places, where it makes a good Show, and flowers freely.
 The Monks-hood makes a very good Appearance with its Spikes of blue Flowers; and also the Lilly of the Valley does not only grow well, but blossom every Year. There is an Instance of it now in a close Place at the Back of Guildhall.
 For the further Imbellishment of these Places, we may also plant Colchicums, which make a fine Show in Autumn.
 The Everlasting Pea thrives and blossoms very well when it has stood a Year or two; but often transplanting it, hinders its flowering.
 The Fraxinella grows and flowers very well in Aldermanbury.
 The double Rose, Campion, Valerian, and double Featherfew, will all grow and flourish in the City, and should be planted in the Spring fresh out of the Gardens; for it is too commonly the Case that the Roots of these Plants either dry and perish, or are rotted by too long soaking in Water, if they have been any time in the Markets.
 I think I have now done with the Flowers that will remain good in the Ground all the Year about; I shall next speak of those which are bulbous rooted, and should be taken up from time to time.
 Pinks and Carnations will hold very well in London, in open Places, if they are taken care of in the Winter.
 But Stock July Flowers and WallFlowers will not last above a Summer in Town, as far as my Experience informs me; but I desire that may not hinder others from trying. There may be, for ought I know, some Means found out to preserve such Plants: But I will not pretend to teach more than I have experienced. The surest Way to have them do well, is to transplant them carefully, and suddenly, with good Balls of Earth about their Roots.
  Twopage  schematic drawing of a park or square CHAP. II. Of making and adorning Squares; and how to dispose the several Plants in them. HAving now treated of such Evergreens, Trees for Shade, flowering Shrubs and Flowers proper to adorn a Square; I come next to the disposing of them in such a manner as will afford the best Appearance. 
The Part of the Draught, mark'd A, is a Grass Platt encompass'd with a Bed for Flowers; and in the middle of the Grass may be placed a Statue, or Urn, which will give a good Ornament: Between this Grass and the Border, should be a Water-Table about eighteen Inches, or two Foot wide, to be laid with red Sand, or Cockle-Shells, and the Border a a to be planted with Flowers, as follows.
 The durable Edging should be ScarletThrift, or Dutch-Box, if the Place be very open; and at four Inches distance from it in the Border, should be set Crocus of several Kinds; and here and there some of the Winter-Aconite, whose yellow Flowers will make an agreeable Show early in the Spring. Within these again, we may plant some of the great and small Stars of Bethlem or Ornithogalum, which with their Spikes of white Flowers will make a good Appearance. We may also put in some Hyacinths of the white and blue Sorts, which will blow well if they are taken up every Year, for else they will be so apt to increase in small Roots, that they will not blossom as they should do; and to crown the whole, we should plant some Tulips at proper Distances in the Lines, which will be very ornamental in the time of their Flower. But as the Gaiety of the Flowers I have named, will be over by the End of May; so we must take Care to provide something to succeed them, which may be Sweet-Williams, Italian Starwort, and the true Primrose; but I think Lillies are too high for this Bed: But then we have sufficient Amends made us for this Want, by the numberless Varieties of annual Flowers, which will garnish the Bed with Flowers of all Colours, till October. As for Example, among the Dwarf Kinds, there is the Annual-Stock, Venus Looking-Glass, Venus Navelwort, Candy-Tufts, small blue-Convolvulus, Flos-Adonis, Cyanus, Dutch-Poppy, Garden-Poppy, China-Pinks, Lupines, Nigilla Romana, Sweet-scented Peas, wing'd Peas, HeartEase, or Viola-Tricolor; these being properly intermix'd, will afford a considerable Ornament to the Border I have mention'd; but that will depend upon the Person's Judgment that has the ordering and keeping of such a Plantation.
 But to conclude my Relation of this Bed of Flowers, it may be necessary to inform my Readers of the particular Beauties of the Annual Flowers I have mention'd, that they may guess at what is to be expected from a Border garnish'd, as I have directed.
 In the first Place, the Dwarf AnnualStock grows in little Tufts, well furnish'd with Flowers of a Peach-bloom Colour, and will hold about six Weeks.
 Venus Looking-Glass grows likewise in low Tufts, cover'd with deep blue Flowers, and lasts about six Weeks.
 Venus Navelwort is also a small tufted Plant, garnish'd with white Flowers, and lasts about six Weeks. 
Candy-Tufts are of two Sorts, only differing in the Colour of their Flowers; the one white, and the other red. The Plant grows in a little low Tuft, and brings likewise its Flowers in Tufts, and makes a good Show for six Weeks.
 Small blue Convolvolus spreads upon the Ground, and bears its Flowers at the Joints. They are shaped like a Bell; of a fine azure Colour, with a Mixture of white and yellow in the Middle. This Plant keeps blossoming above two Months.
 Flos-Adonis is a pretty Plant, with small cut Leaves; among which are placed its Flowers of a dazling red Colour. It lasts about two Months.
 Cyanus, or Bottle-Flower, is about a Foot high, bearing its Flowers on the Top, of various Colours, viz. white Flesh-colour, and of several Kinds of blue. They last above six Weeks.
 Dutch-Poppy grows in the manner of the Field-Poppy, but brings one of the most beautiful Flowers that can be imagin'd. They are commonly as double as a Rose of a rich Scarlet striped with white, as fine as a Carnation.
 The Garden-Poppy makes a larger Plant than the Dutch-Poppy, and brings very large Flowers, and very double; some Purple and White, some all Purple, others all White; some all Red, and some striped with White and Red. They make an extraordinary Show, but hardly last three Weeks.
 The China-Pink, or Indian-Pink, has only this in it, which seems to suffer it to grow in Places annoy'd with the Smoke of the Sea-Coal; and that is, because it blossoms the same Year that the Seed is sown; which our other Pinks or Carnations never do, no more than the SweetWilliam, which is of the same Family. These Indian-Pinks, indeed, do not only blossom the first Year, but will remain good in the Country two or three Years. Their Blossoms are of various Kinds with Regard to their Colours; so that they distinguish themselves in all the Course of Colours between White and Black, unless in the Yellow; for there are some which tend towards Blue very much, so deep is their Purple.
 I observe in Pinks and Carnations, the Red and White prevails most, and the Purple very rarely, but in some Cases only; but a strict Blue never, no more than a strict Yellow; tho' I have heard of a yellow Carnation, but never saw it. Now when any of these Carnations run to a plain Colour, they run to the deepest of their Colours, either the Red or the Purple, but never to the White, as I can find.
 The Lupine is of four or five Kinds, viz. that with the yellow Flower, the small blue Flower, the great blue Flower, and the red, and that with the white Flower. These all bear their Flowers on Spikes, and make agreeable Figures. 'Tis the Opinion of some, that the Yellow, which is most common, is most to be admired, because its Spikes of Flowers are well set with Blossoms, and those Blossoms are scented like Violets; but there are so many different Tastes, that I cannot judge which is the best. Some chuse a Blue rather than the Yellow; others love Flowers without any Scent, rather than those that have been much esteem'd for their fine Smell.
 The Nigila-Romana, or as some have it, the Devil in the Bush, is rather an odd Plant, than beautiful in its Flower; for the Blossom is of a very pale blue Colour, and is encompass'd with shagged Leaves, as if it was ty'd up in a Bunch of Fewel; however, one would not be without it for the sake of its strange Appearance.
 The sweet-scented Pea makes a beautiful Plant, having Spikes of Flowers of a red and blue Colour. The Scent is somewhat like Honey, and a little tending to the Orange-flower Smell. These blossom a long time.
 The wing'd Pea is a dwarf Plant, but makes a pretty Figure when it is in Flower. Its Blossoms are of a glaring red, and its Cods of Peas are furbelow'd on the Edges. It lasts in Beauty about two Months.
 Heart-Ease, or Viola-Tricolor, is a small Plant, which lies flat to the Ground, but its Flowers are very much to be admired for their beautiful Colours, which are commonly Yellow, Purple, and White; and sometimes otherways beautified. They last a good while in Flower, and will blossom almost at any Time of the Year, according to the Time of sowing them.
 Thus far I have given the Reader an Account of the Flowers, which may be used for the more open Borders in a London Square; but those Places might otherways be made Fountains of, and the Sight of such might perhaps please some People as much as the Sight of these little Parterres. Some large Basons of Water in such a Place might be useful, if any of the Neighbours should be disturb'd by Fire. But this depends upon those who will be at the Expence of beautifying such Squares.
 We next come to the manner of adorning the Borders under the Hedges, which bound the several Divisions of our Wilderness-Work. The Borders mark'd B B in the Draught, are those Borders which I mean.
 The Flowers for these Borders may be more tall than in the other Beds. Here we may have Lillies, either the Orange or white-flower'd Kinds; the Perennial Sun-flower, Tree Primrose, and SweetWilliams, and Martagons to blow at different Seasons, and the Roman-Lilly, Fleming-Lilly, the Edging of Thrift, and within that a Line of Crocus of the Yellow, and behind that a Line of the Purple Sort; some Ornithogalums, and some Tulips, or other Flowers mention'd for the Ornament of the other Beds. But among the durable Flowers, we should not omit the Starworts, which blow high, and make a good Show, with their purple and yellow Blossoms.
 As for Annuals, which blow tall, they are necessary to succeed the Flowers I have mention'd; the Great Convolvulus, the Scarlet-Bean, which are Twisters, the Great Purple Amaranth, the Annual Sunflower, if we please, the French Marygold, the African Marygold, Sweet-Sultan, Female-Balsams. These will do very well, if the Walks are open enough to allow them even the London Air with Freedom.
 The Flowers which are durable, and are here recommended, need not be described; but because every one may not perhaps judge of the Annual Sorts, I shall say a Word or two concerning their Beauties. 
The Great Convolvulus is a twisting Plant, and requires a Supporter. The Plant of it self does not make an extraordinary Figure, but the Blossoms, which are of a Bell-make, are large, and of a purple Colour. The Plant holds in Blossom a great while.
 The Scarlet Bean, so call'd from the Colour of its Flowers, makes a fine Appearance when it is in Blossom; the Spikes of Flowers are pretty long, and well set; and if they have Liberty, and a Support from their begining to grow, will hold flowering several Months.
 The Great Purple Amaranth, or Princes Feather, will make a large Plant, if it likes the Ground. Its Leaves are of a purple Colour, and its long Strings of Blossoms, which in some Places have measured two Foot in length, makes it as handsome a Plant as one would desire.
 It holds in Beauty several Months.
 The Annual Sun-flower is also a ramping Plant, but makes little better Show than the Perennial Sun-flower, only the Blossom of the Annual Sort is larger than the other; and the double-blossom'd Sort flowers a great while. 
The French Marygold will make an agreeable Mixture in these Borders, with its beautiful Velvet Flowers, intermix'd with yellow and red Colours. It flowers several Months, and is one of the most agreeable Annuals we have. In these open Places, it may be sown in the Spring, in order to make a large Plant; but my ingenious Friend and BrotherGardener, Mr. Benjamin Whitmill, sows them in Winter, that they may blossom in a narrow Compass the succeeding Summer, for the sake of those who have very little Room, and are desirous of Flowers.
 The African Marygold is also a fine Plant, and blossoms like the former for many Months. However, the Flowers of these are much larger than the French Marygold; but then they are only Yellow, without any Mixture of other Colour, which occasions the chief Beauty of the French Marygold.
 The Sweet-Sultan is of three or four Sorts; one kind has a purple Flower, another a white Flower, and the third has a yellow Flower; but this last is very scarce. The Smell of this Flower is like Musk; it lasts blossoming many Months. 
The Female-Balsams make very agreeable Plants, yielding Flowers, some of a purple Colour, some of a Peach-bloom Colour, and some white; and again some are mix'd with one of these Colours, and white. They last a long while in Flower.
 There are yet some other Flowers that would grow and thrive in such large Places as St. James's Square, Bloomsbury Square, Moorfields, or Lincoln's-Inn Fields, &c. as well as in the Temple Garden, and other Gardens in London and Westminster; but these are enough at present. I shall therefore now proceed to treat of the other proper Embellishments for a Square; that is, the Trees for Shade, the Ever-greens, and flowering Shrubs. And first, of those which will do best for Hedges, to divide the Quarters.
 The Plants proper for Hedges in this Case, are either Limes or Elms; and of the latter, either the Dutch or English Elm will do well; and the Hawthorn or Whitethorn, which makes good Hedges in the Charter-house Wilderness. The Ever-greens, which I have mention'd, do not thrive so well with much Cutting, as they will do otherwise; for the smoky Air of the Town seems to have a very considerable Effect upon them, when they are prun'd; tho' it is still convenient to prune off the dead Wood when we find it. We must consider, that in Nature there is no such thing as Pruning; and when a Tree is under the Power of the London Smoke, which is not so free and open, nor so healthful to it as the Country Air, it has enough to do to support Life; and it would therefore do it a double Injury to wound it with the Knife, when it wanted convenient Help to heal its Wounds, and was but low in Health; tho' it might bear with worse Treatment, if it enjoy'd its natural Station, where every thing was ready for its Support and Preservation. Some learned Men say, that whatever can be made agreeable to a sick Man, will help his Cure, or contribute to his Health; but whatever is the contrary, encreases his Distemper, and might even cause his Death: And sure nothing could be more tending to his Detriment, than wounding him when his Body was already weak and low? But the Cutting off a Limb would surely give so great a Change in the Circulation of Juices, that a sick Man could not bear; and a Person in the best State of Health could hardly endure. But I am gone far enough upon this Head at present. In a Word, 'tis not every Tree that will grow in London, that will bear Pruning.
 To fill up the Ground within the Quarters, I recommend to plant the tallest Sort of Trees in the Middle of each Quarter, and so to let them decrease in their Stature till we come to the Hedge Sides that enclosure them; and all these Plants should be so order'd, that an equal Quantity of Ever-greens should be planted with the rest, because of the Winter Prospect. The Part of the Quarters which I mean, are mark'd C C C, in which all the Ever-greens I have mention'd, should have their Place to shoot freely in their own Way; and as for the other Plants which are to accompany them, I think they should chiefly consist of the White Thorn, Curran, Almond, Pears kept in a Dwarf Manner, Apples in the same Way, and the flowering Shrubs; and of these it is chiefly that I speak, when I would furnish the Insides of the Quarters; for those Trees which are apt to rise higher, and become greater in Bulk, would too soon incumber the Prospect; and 'tis enough therefore, that what we plant here rise two, three or four Foot above the Hedges. But then towards the Center, the middle Walk D D D about it, may be planted with Horse-Chesnuts, which will grow regular, and rise above the rest of the Wilderness-Plants; and between the Stems of these Trees, the Quarters of Wilderness-Work would be look'd into, and yield a new Variety of Prospect, which I think should be study'd in every Garden; for the more Change there is in a Garden, the more it is to be admired, in my Opinion.
 From the inner Row to the Center E, should be a Mount, cover'd with Trees very close set together; and upon this the Elm, the Lime, and others of the tallest Growth, should be put. But by no Means on the Outside of such a Square, should be planted any Trees that rise higher than the Wall or Pale-side, because they will break the Prospect of the whole Design; which should by no Means be interrupted next to the Houses, by which the whole is to be maintained. It may be objected perhaps, that at the first Planting of tall growing Trees on the Outside, they will not much hinder the Prospect; but we must then consider, that they are planted to grow large, and when they come to the desired Perfection, they must stand in our Way, and resist our Sight, and so rob the Gentlemen of that View which they have by their Expence endeavour'd to gain.
 But I shall not say much more upon this Head, only that we may remark, that large Pieces of Ground, such as are in the Squares I have mention'd, may be put into such Order, as will contribute to the Pleasure and Happiness of those Gentlemen who have Habitations in them. And I have heard a learned Man say, that where there was the greatest Opportunity of recreating the Spirits, the Mind was improved by that Opportunity; and that a Mind so improv'd, found always the nearest Way to do Business, and fill the Purse. For as he tells me in the same Letter, a Mind distracted, or confin'd, is like base Money, that does not only want a Currency in a Place, but must be nail'd down, to prevent any Inconvenience its Progress might occasion to the Publick: And so, as I have observ'd before, that most People love a Country Prospect, and are even pleased with the most narrow View of it, I conceive the adorning the Squares in the Rural Manner I propose, will contribute much to the Ease of those, who by their being Great and Noble, are Inhabitants of such Places.
 CHAP. III. Of the Part of London next the River Thames; how far we may promise our selves Success in Gardening there. IF we begin at Westminster, and come towards the City, we must first survey that Garden which belongs to the Right Honourable the Earl of Halifax, near the Parliament-House. We find there not only many Plants that I have mention'd, but many others, which will not do so well in Squares, which are situate in the Middle of the Town. 
After this, to come to Whitehall, the late Mr. Heymen's had several Pots of Flowers, both Auriculas and Carnations, which blossom'd very well, as has been related to me.
 The Garden at Somerset-house had also been observ'd to produce several Varieties of Things, which the more Inland Parts of the Town have not generally been garnish'd with.
 And the Temple Gardens have afforded many Varieties of Plants; even Wallflowers, Stocks and Carnations have grown there, and a good Number of Exotick Plants. These Places indeed lie all to the Water, and to the Sun, so that they are open on one Side to the Air; and perhaps the constant rising Vapour from the River, helps the Plants against the poisonous Quality in the City Smoke. Now we must consider, that in Places in London, where every Part is encompass'd with Smoke, and the Air is suffocated, or wants its true Freedom; Plants, which generally are used to the open Air, will not be always so healthful: and therefore I have now made it my Business to consult what Plants will live even in the worst Air of Chimneys, and the most pent up Air that we know. In my Chapter of Adorning of Squares, I have already said, that most of the hot-bed Annuals will grow well, and so will several Sorts of bulbose Roots, as the Crocus, Hyacinth, and some others, even to last some Years, if they are planted in due Time, and taken up at a proper Season. So the Lylac, Vine, Mulberry, Curran, Sun-flowers, and most of what I have named, will grow very well, if they have a right Care taken of them; but I commonly find that those Persons, who chiefly delight in adorning their Balconies, and other convenient Parts of their Habitations, with Greens or Flowers, have so little Knowledge of the Matter, that they too frequently lay out their Money upon those Things which will not afford them half so much Pleasure as a Nosegay, or common Bason of Flowers. For when Plants are brought to Market in Flower, such as Tulips, Hyacinths, Narcissus, and Roots of these Kinds, they may be subject to two Inconveniences; either they become faint by being taken out of the Ground when they begin to flower, and so will not last half their Time, or else they are brought from some very clean Air into our thick Air, which Change will never agree with them. I have heard that in some Parts in England, which are very watry, the People that are born there, are healthful, and live to great Ages; but if those who are born and bred in high Places of clean Air, come to inhabit those watry Countries, they soon begin to decline, and die in a short time; and this Case may explain to us, that Plants, which are brought to London from a very clean Air, will not thrive with us, or near so well as those that have been trained up within the Smoke of the Town. And besides, as I hinted before, the moving them at wrong Times of the Year, is the Occasion that many have been disappointed.
 But from my own Experience, I shall put this into a better Light, that those curious Persons in London, who delight in Gardening, may not be imposed upon in buying such Roots as can neither make any good Show for the Time their Flowers remain, nor will live till the second; so that the Money laid out after this Manner is lost, and a common BoughPot will make a better Appearance, and last longer ornamental.
 The Method therefore which should be taken to prevent this Mischief, should be to buy the Roots of each Sort when they are dry, and plant them about the End of September, or in October, in fine Earth; and they will blow strong and well the following Spring, and remain four times as long in Blossom, as any of those Roots that are brought to Market in Flower.
 When these have done blowing, and the Stalks begins to grow dry, we should take the Roots out of the Ground; and when they are dry'd, put them in Papers, and keep them, till the Planting Season, in some dry Place. Now as most of these Roots, when we take them up, will have some small Roots or Off-sets joining to them, we must take care that such young Roots be taken from the old ones, for else they would hinder the old Roots from blowing the second Year; and besides, it would be necessary, in close Places especially, to have fresh Earth every Year for them; for the Earth that has been used a Year, has its Surface too much impregnated with the London Soot, to keep the Roots in Health: And besides, the little Quantity of Earth which can be contain'd in Cases, Pots and Tubs, has its Strength soon exhausted, and would want a little refreshing now and then, even if they were to be always in the Country. A very curious Gentleman, Mr. Trowel, of the Temple, told me, that he once, at his Country-Seat, strew'd a little Soot upon the Surface of the Ground, about some Tulips he had growing, and that all the Roots which he had treated in that Manner perish'd; which may shew us the Necessity of refreshing from Time to Time, the Earth in the Boxes, Cases, or Borders, which stand too much in the way of the sooty London Smoke.
 We must observe in the planting these bulbous Roots, that we plant the roundest and largest by themselves, for they are surely Blowers, but the flat and long Roots will not blow till the Season following.
 With this Way of Management, I doubt not but our London Gardens, however small they are, will be ornamental from Year to Year, without the common Loss which now generally attends many of them; and in little Compass, there may be a very agreeable Variety, beyond what there has been, occasion'd, as I conceive, for the want of Knowledge in the Art.
 But to prevent any Hazard or Trouble, it is generally thought the surest Way to purchase fresh Roots from Year to Year, which may be had at a very cheap Rate. ------ ------
 CHAP. IV. Of Court-Yards, and close Places in the City. THIS Part of City Gardening depends upon more Skill than all the rest; for here we have little Liberty of Air; and it has been thought difficult to provide such Plants as would barely live in such Places: And also it has been judged impossible, that any Plant should last there in Health for any Time. Now therefore, to remedy this Defect, I shall from Experience give the Names of such Plants as will grow and prosper in the closest Parts of London, viz.
 The Lime-Tree. The Lylac, with the white Flower. The Lylac, with the blue Flower. The Lylac, with the Purple Flower. The Persian Jessamin. The Bladder Senna. The Figg. The Mulberry. The Virginia Creeper. The Vine. The Common Privet. The Angelica. The Lillies. The Perennial Sunflower. The Martegons. John Tradescant's Starwort. London Pride. Currans. Elder. Gilder-Rose. These will remain good a long Time, if they are well taken Care of; and to them we may join many Sorts of Annual Flowers, as French Marygold, African Marygolds, Annual Sunflower, &c.
 As a farther Ornament to such Places, we may add such Plants and Flowers as will make a good Summer Show; and these are the French Honeysuckle, Pinks, Daisies of various Kinds, Double-Stocks, Scarlet Lichness, Wall-flowers, DoubleRockets, and Pots of breeding Tulips, which will blow much better than the striped Sorts. All these must be had in Pots fresh from the Garden, just as they begin to blow. There are other Plants which would likewise stand in such Places, but that depends upon the Largeness and Situation of the Places they are to be planted in; but I shall be ready at any Time to advise what will do, if I am consulted.
 I have mention'd before, that the Lylacs will grow well in Squares and open Places; but they will also make a very good Show in the closest Parts of the Town, as may be observed in TavernYards, and the most narrow Alleys and small Courts in and about the City.
 The Bladder Senna I have seen grow well in a Court in Crutched Fryers.
 The Figg grows very well in some close Places about Bridewell, altho' encompass'd with Houses on every Side, which are so high, that the Sun never reaches them in Winter. These Figg-trees are about fifteen Foot high, and are Green from near the Ground to the Top; for which Reason, I wonder it has not not been more generally propagated in the City Gardens; especially since they will not only thrive well in London, but bear good Fruit too, if they are well pruned. I suppose one Reason why this Plant has been neglected is, because the Pruning of the Figg has been but little understood; but since the new Way of Pruning has been put in Practice, I have my self had two Crops of Figgs ripen upon a Tree in one Year. And by this Pruning, there is now a good Prospect of Figgs this Year, at the Reverend Dr. Bennett's Garden at Cripplegate; and near the same Place, there are now large Figg-Trees growing well, tho' they have very little Air.
 The Mulberry will grow very well in the closest Courts or Alleys in London. There are now two large Mulberry-Trees growing in a little Yard, about sixteen Foot square, at Sam's Coffee-house in Ludgate-street. There are two likewise, at the Hall belonging to the Worshipful Company of Clothworkers, which have stood there many Years, and bear plentifully, and ripen very well. These may be either planted in Tubs or Cases, and treated as Standards, or nail'd against Walls.
 The Creeper of Virginia is a Plant well known to grow in the closest Places in the City, even where there is no Sun at all; and if they are fresh taken out of the Garden, and are healthful Plants, they will make Shoots of six or eight Foot long the first Year: And for the Good of their future Growth, they should be prun'd and nail'd at Autumn; for when the Top Shoots are suffer'd to hang down, so as to cover the under Shoots, such under Shoots are apt to die, and the Plant becomes thin; and then again the Pruning at this Season, encourages the rest of the Plant to shoot strong in the Spring, and make large Leaves.
 This Plant is likewise excellent for the Ornament of Balconies and Windows, and will grow so well in Pots or Cases, that it will soon cover the Walls, and shade the Windows, if they lie exposed to the Sun. I need not refer to any particular Place, where this may be observ'd, since there is hardly a Street, Court, or Alley in London, without some Examples of what I relate of it.
 The Vine will not only grow well in close Places, but likewise bear Fruit too where there is very little Sun. At the Rose-Tavern without Temple bar, there is a Vine that covers an Arbour, where the Sun very rarely comes, and has had ripe Grapes upon it; and at a Coffee-house next to Grey's-Inn-Gate, there is now a Vine which grows very well in a small Pot, tho' it is constantly kept in a close Room; this Year it was full of Leaves before Christmas.
 The Common Privet will make a good Show in very close Places, if it is taken fresh from the Garden, and proper Care taken to water and prune it as it requires; for the watering Part there is no certain Times prescribed for doing it, nor can the Quantity of Water for it be exactly calculated, because some Plants are large, some small; the Pots or Cases, as they are larger and smaller, require more or less; and also some Places will hold the Earth longer moist than others. But this must be left to the Judgment of every one, and must be practised as Occasion represents, which a little Use will teach us. It will be necessary now and then, for the Welfare of this, and all other cased Plants, to stir and loosen the Earth on the Tops of the Pots or Cases, which otherwise would be apt to bind and grow hard, to the hindrance of the Plants Growth. So likewise we should from Time to Time add a little fresh Earth to our Pots, by which Means the Plants will become more vigorous. At Bridewell, some Places near Guildhall, and at Aldermanbury, there are Instances of this Plant's good Thriving, even so much as to cover Walls six or eight Foot high. This is best prun'd in Winter.
 We have Instances enough that Angelica will thrive very well, and make an handsome Plant in the closest and most smoaky Parts of the City; and I have lately seen Hops growing very vigorously in a close Alley near Whitecross Street, which I am told bears Hops every Year.
 The Lilly, Martegon, and Perennial Sun-Flower, I have describ'd elsewhere: But I may add thus much, that if we were to plant of all their forts, there might be a Succession of their Flowers for near three Months, for the different Sorts blow at different Times; and we find by Experience that they will live and thrive well in very close Places, even in the Heart of the City, and will last several Years.
 John Tradescant's Starwort, which I have mention'd before, grows likewise very well in the closest Places, and will thrive well in Pots, if it be discreetly managed, and make a good Show.
 Currans conform themselves well to the City Smoak. There are many Instances of their growing well in close Places, such as Tavern-Yards, and even upon Leads on the Top of Houses amidst the Chimneys; they may be either kept in Pots or Cases, giving them gentle Waterings when necessary, and not too much or too little at one Time, which sometimes injures the Plants; or after a great Drought to give them abundance at one Time, may occasion their Death: In such a Case, their Waterings should be moderate, and often repeated to recover them; for 'tis with Plants as with Animals that have fasted a long Time, their Food must be dispens'd to them by gentle Degrees, and not too much at one Time, for fear of surfeiting them. This Management relates to all sorts of Plants that require Water.
 The Elder will make a good Addition to the Ornament of our close Gardens; and I am of Opinion might bear Fruit in such open Places, as the Squares I mention, for it thrives well where no Sun can come at it, and is very closely encompass'd with Houses; there are four Sorts of it, viz. that with the black Berries, the white berry'd Elder, the striped leav'd Elder, and the Parsley leav'd Elder; every one of which make very handsome Plants.
 The Guildrose has likewise been experience'd to grow well in very close Places, and remain a long Time.
 As for Annual Flowers, such as French Marygolds, African Marygolds, and Annual Sun-flowers, I have given a Description of them before; they will do very well in the closest Places, to be planted just before they blow.
 I may add likewise that Daisies, which are brought fresh out of the Garden in Flower will make a good Show a long while; and that Crocus's, if the Roots are planted fresh every Autumn, will blossom very well, tho' the Winter Sun does not reach them. I shall now proceed to the adorning Balconies in large Streets, which I account the Medium between the most airy Places, and the closest Parts of the City.
 ------ ------ CHAP. V. Ornaments and Decorations for Balconies, and the Outsides of Windows in large Streets. THAT we may begin early in the Spring to have a pleasant Idea of Gardening, and the Delights of the Country, I think it necessary to observe, that the Crocus, the Dwarf-flag Iris, Breeding Tulips, Lillies, Martagons, may be planted at Autumn, so as to make a beautiful Spring Appearance, especially where there are Cases or Borders of Earth. 
The Ever-greens which may accompany them, and last the best, are the Bay, Standard Ivy, Dutch and English Box, Italian Ever-green Privet; and for flowering Shrubs, the Lalac, Guilderose, and Jessamines, where there is Sun, will blow very well, as will likewise all those Flowers and Plants in Pots, which I have mention'd for the Ornament of close Places.
 The Flowers which may be brought in to such Places, a little before their Blossom, in order to succeed those that are past their flowering, may be Polyanthos, Auriculas, Wall-flowers, Double Stocks, Double Rockets, Pinks, Sweet Williams, Province Rose, Carnations, French Hony-suckles, Double Scarlet Lychness.
 But for one of the most lasting Beauties in this Branch of Gardening, I would recommend Apple-Trees, grassed upon Paradise Stocks, in Pots, which will, where there is any tolerable Sun and Air, prosper very well if they are brought from the Gardens in Flowers. I have known some Trees of this sort which have born successively for five Years, without changing their Place, as may be now observed at the Record Office in the Tower of London, by the Management of Mr. Holmes; and in more close Places, I have known some of these Trees which have born three Years successively, by only lodging them, towards Winter, in the Country, and bringing them back again to London when in Bloom. We might still add to the Ornaments for Balconies, young Oranges and Mirtles, which would yield a pleasing Variety, and thrive very well; but those Orange-Trees that are grassed, and will blossom and bear Fruit, will do much better in Chambers, tho' in the Summer Time, than stand out of Doors, tho' there are Instances of the latter in London.
 There is hardly any Annual which is mentioned for the Squares that will not make some Show in such Balconies where the Sun and Air is free, so that we are at little Loss for Ornaments for such Places; and as Water in London may be generally brought as high as a Balcony, it might be ordered so as to play now and then in a little Stream, or Jett in some Figure, or Piece of Rock Work, proportion'd to the Bigness of the Balcony or Leads where we have our Garden. There has been a long Time a Fountain in the Manner I speak of at a Plummer's the upper End of the Hay Market, near Piccadilly; or if such a Figure should not be agreeable, a Model might be made from some of the Waterworks in Versailles Gardens, to be fixed at Pleasure to the Water-Pipe, and changed for others if we saw convenient.
 To the Plants I have mention'd, we may add many sorts of Aloes, which will do very well in London; and also some of those strange Plants call'd Torch-Thistles, and also some sorts of the Fig Marygolds on Ficoides. Mr. Jobber, a very curious Gentleman, in Norfolk-Street, has cultivated several Sorts of them with good Success, and preserv'd them well in Winter, as well as Summer, the Aloes especially, which should have no Water from Michaelmas till May; and in a much closer Place than this, i. e. Aldermanbury, Mr. Smith an Apothecary has a very good Collection of these succulent or juicy Plants, which he has kept for many Years.
 The Aloes are so surprizingly different from the other Plants of the Garden, that I judge they will contribute very much to the Decoration and Beauty of such Places as I am now treating of; for besides the strange Form and Manner of their Growth, their Leaves are in some Sorts spotted with White, edged with Thorns, others with their Leaves curl'd like Rams Horns; and again, others have their Leaves smooth on the Edges, and cover'd with white Knobs, like Pearls; but it is almost impossible to express all their Beauties: I have now about thirty Sorts differing very much from one another.
 But where there is not the Conveniency of a Balcony, the Chambers of a House may have their Ornaments, which may last well for a considerable Time, especially while Fires are not in use. 
The Chimneys which are generally dress'd in Summer with fading Bough Pots, might be as well adorn'd at once with living Plants, as I have observ'd at her Grace's the late excellent Dutchess of Beaufort.
 If one was to have a Pyramid of Shelves to be covered with Pots of blossoming Orange-Trees, with Fruit upon them, intermixt with Mirtles, Aloes, &c. for Variety-sake, it would be extremely beautiful for the Summer; and the Pots, to add the greater Beauty, might be of Delph Ware, or well painted, to stand in Dishes, which are now in Use; so that when we water the Plants, the Water will not run upon the Floor.
 The Orange-Trees may be brought to such Places, either to be set in Chimneys, or in the Windows, when they are in Flower, and remain till August, and then be sent back; the Garden to be taken Care of for the Winter at the usual Price.
 Box or Privet to be train'd up in a Fan Fashion, will do very well in Chimneys for a Summer, if they are now and then set abroad at Night, and in Showers of Rain, and are regularly water'd; and with these we may also place white Lillies taken up in Bunches, just as they are coming into Flower, and potted they will make a good Show, and will last beautiful a long Time, and perfume the House almost as well as a Tuberose.
 So likewise for Change we may set Pots of Campenulas, which last in flower a long Time, and make a fine Appearance with their long Spikes of blue Flowers, and yield a grateful Scent: But all these Things may be vary'd according to the Fancy of the Persons who delight in such Ornaments. The Aloes and Torch-Thistles, tho' yet little known in London, add an extraordinary Gaiety to those Plants I have mention'd for Chimneys, and require very little Care, as I find from those Gentlemen in London, who have purchas'd them of me.
 To further this Variety, if we have Convenience of a Place to set Pots abroad, or without Doors, we may have most of the Annual Flowers to interchange from Time to Time, as it may be judg'd proper.
 Perhaps many that have Gardens in London are acquainted but with few Sorts of the Plants or Flowers, that I have set down for beautifying the City Gardens; their best Way therefore to be inform'd will be to view the Gardens at Hoxton, and other Places near the Town, where they may see all the Variety of Flowers that blow in the Spring, Summer, and Autumn Seasons; and then consult with the Gardener about those they like best, especially which should be planted at Autumn, and which in the Spring.
 The next Thing to be consider'd is to have a Gardener of Judgment to manage a City Garden; for a Gardener that has been bred in the Country, and has not had Practice about the Town, knows little more of managing a Garden in London than one that is bred to Plow and Cart.
 There are many ignorant Pretenders, who call at Houses where they know there is any Ground, let it be in Season or out of Season, and tell the Owners it is a good Time to dress and make up their Gardens; and often impose on them that employ them, by telling them every Thing will do, when perhaps it is a wrong Season; for most sorts of Things they plant, and even few sorts of those Plants they recommend, will grow, tho' they were to be planted in a right Season.
 This is a great Discouragement, which makes those Persons, who delight a little in a Garden, neglect doing any Thing at all, thinking all their Labour and Cost thrown away.
 Another Disappointment these Lovers of Gardens meet with, is from the Markets; for most of those People who sell the Trees and Plants in Stocks and other Markets, are Fruiterers, who understand no more of Gardening than a Gardener does the making up the Compound Medicines of an Apothecary. They often tell us the Plants will prosper, when there is no Reason or Hopes of their growing at all; for I and others have seen Plants that were to be sold in the Markets, that were as uncertain of Growth as a Piece of Noah's Ark would be, had we it here to plant; but when such Plants are bought at the Gardens where they were raised, there can be no Deceit, without the Gardener who sold them loses his Character.
 But as I suppose this chiefly happens through the Ignorance of the Higglers in Plants, so it is reasonable to judge that bred Gardeners, who have study'd the Art, are the most proper Persons to be apply'd to in Gardening Affairs, rather than trust to those who have never had an Opportunity of knowing what a Garden is: For my part, notwithstanding I have been about Forty Years in the Business of Gardening, I find the Art so mysterious, that the whole Life of a Man may be employ'd in it, without gaining a true Knowledge of every Thing necessary to be done.
 But this Mischief is no new Thing among us, as we find plainly in the Preamble to the Charter granted by King James the First, for establishing a Corporation and Company of London Gardeners, which then had a good Effect; but afterwards being somewhat neglected, King Charles, by Proclamation, order'd the said Charter to be put in Force in order to suppress those Dealers in Plants, which imposed upon his Subjects, by selling them unwarrantable Goods.
 Some People, perhaps, may be so illnatur'd to think that I write this to hinder them of their Business; but those who know me are very sensible I am rather for promoting than discouraging those Men of the Trade who are fair Dealers; nor can it be out of Self-Interest that I publish this, seeing already I have a Share of the Gardening Business: Therefore I desire all that read it will have the same View I have in writing of it, which is purely for the publick Service.
 Tho' I have confin'd my self in these Papers, to the Management or Ordering of City Gardening only, yet it is not to be understood that my Practice is alone confined to that. The many Experiments I am now making in my Gardens, for the Improvement of all sorts of Fruits, Flowers, and Trees, at the Request of several Gentlemen in the Country, who are my Customers; were I here to insert an Account of them, would make a Work much larger than I design at this Time; or indeed would it be very proper to joyn with my present Subject; but it is likely I may find Time to offer these and some other Experiments to the Publick hereafter, for the further Confirmation of the Generation of Plants, and the Circulation of Sap. 
 FINIS.  
