A true and exact RELATION of the Marchings of the Two Regiments of the Trained Bands of the City of London, Being the  Red & blew Regiments, As also Of the three Regiments of the Auxiliary forces, the Blew, Red, and Orange, who marched forth for the reliefe of the City of Glocester from August 23. to Sept. 28. Wherein the most materiall passages of every dayes Marchings are briefly delineated. As also a true description of the severall battells and Skirmishes had against the Enemy at Stow the old Sept. 4. at Aburne Chase September 18. and at  Newbery Septem. 20. Set forth for the satisfaction of many who earnestly desired information herein, By Henry Foster, quondam Serjeant to Cap. George Mosse. ------ This is licensed and entred into the Hall book. ------ Exod. 15.6,7. Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power; thy right hand, O Lord; hath dashed in peeces the enemy. And in the greatnesse of thine excellency thou hast overthrowne them that rose up against thee; thou didst send forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble. ------ London, Printed for Ben. Allen in Popes-head-Alley, Octo. 2. 1643.
 A TRUE RELATION OF THE Diurnall Marchings of the Red and Blew Regiments of the Trained Bands of the City of London, as also the three Regiments of the Auxiliary Forces. Wherein the most materiall passages of every dayes Occurrences are briefly delineated. VPon Wednesday the 23 of August, our red Regiment, of the Train'd Bands marched into the new Artillery ground, and from thence that night wee marched to Brainford, and came thither about one a clocke in the morning; from whence the next day many of our Citizens, who seemed very forward and willing at the first to march with us, yet upon some pretences and faire excuses returned home againe hiring others to goe in their roome; others returned home againe the same night before they came to Brainford. 
Upon Friday the 25 of August, wee advanced from Brainford to Vxbridge, where our Regiments were Quartered there that night, and marched away the next morning.
 Saterday the 26 of August we advanced to a Towne 6 miles beyond Vxbridge called Chaffan, where wee were quartered that night; at this towne a souldier belonging to Lievtenant Colonell Tompson was accidentally slaine by shooting off a musket by one of his fellow Souldiers though at a great distance from him, yet shot him in the head whereof hee died.
 Sabbath day 27 August, we advanced from Chaffan neere to a village called Chessun; this day the Blew Regiment of the Trained Bands, and the three Regiments of the Auxiliary forces met us upon a great Common about three miles from Chessun, our whole Regiment was quartered at one Mr. Cheyneys house an Esquire, where we were well accommodated for Beere having great plenty, tow or three hundred of us this night lay in one Barne.
 Monday the 28 of August, we advanced from thence to a towne called Asson-Clinton a little village 3 miles from Alesbury, wee continued here one day and two nights.
 Wednesday the 30 of August, wee advanced from thence to a village called Clayden; this day the Lord Generalls Army and our Regiments of the Trained Band, together with the Auxiliarie forces met at Alesbury; the great Guns were fired at every Fort about the Towne, as the Lord Generall passed by: This was the Fast day: our Regiment was quartered this night at Sir Ralph Verneys House a Parliament man; his Father the Kings Standart-bearer was slain at Edge hill. 
Thursday the 31 of August, wee advanced from thence to a village called Stretton-Araley; this night all our Brigade consisting of six Regiments; viz: Colonell Manwarings Red Regiment, two Regiments of Trained Bands, and three of the Auxiliary, were all quartered at this little village, it is conceived wee were in all of this Brigade about 5000. here was little provision either for Officers or souldiers, the night before we came hither, the Cavaliers were at Bister two miles from this village and 6 miles from Oxford but were beaten out of it by our souldiers and the Lord Generall with his army quartered there this night.
 Friday the 1 day of September, wee advanced from hence to a place called Bayards-greene in Oxford shire, being three miles distant from Brackley, and eight miles from Banbury, where our Brigade met my Lord Generall with his whole Army; whereat was great shouting and Triumph as he passed by to take a view of our Regiments, the whole Army being drawne up in their severall Regiments, continued there about an houre and then we marched away: It was a goodly and glorious sight to see the whole Army of Horse and foot together; it is conceived by those that viewed our Army well, that wee did consist of (to speake of the least) 15000 horse and foot, some speak of many more. This day good newes was brought to us concerning Glocester, and Exeter. From hence we marched this day to a village called Souldern, foure miles from Banbury, where our six Regiments that came from London were Quartered; and my Lord Generall and the rest of the Army were Quartered about a little mile from us, at a Market town called Ano on the hill; we were very much scanted of Victualls in this place.
 Saterday 2 Septem. wee advanced from hence to Hooknorton, 25 miles from Glocester, at which Village our whole Brigade was quartered. This day the Lord Generals Troops had some skirmish with the Cavaliers; it is reported there was eight slaine of the enemies party and one on ours. From hence we marched away the next morning.
 Sabbath day 3 Septemb. wee advanced from hence to a little Village called Addington about a mile from Stow the Old, the hithermost town in Glocester-shire, and about 20 miles from Glocester; where in our march this day, wee againe met the Lord Generalls Army, upon a great common about halfe a mile from Chippingnorton; at which place also our five Regiments departed from his Army, and marched to the Village aforesaid. The blew Regiment of the Train'd bands marched in the van and tooke up the first quarter in the town; the other 3 Regiments of the Auxiliary forces, were quartered at the adjacent villages; whereupon our red Regiment of the Trained Band was constrained to march halfe a mile further to get quarter, we were now in the Van of the whole Army, having not so much as one Troope of Horse quartered neer us: but we were no sooner in our quarters , and set downe our armes, intending a little to refresh our selves; but presently there was an Alarme beat up, and wee being the frontier Regiment neerest the enemy, were presently all drawn up into a Body, and stood upon our guard all that night, we were in great distraction, having not any horse to send out as Scouts, to give us any intelligence: my Lord Generall with his Army lay at Chippingnorton, about three miles behind us; who had an Alarm there given by the enemy the same night also: Our Regiment stood in the open field all night, having neither bread nor water to refresh our selves, having also marched the day before without any sustenance neither durst we kindle any fire though it was a very cold night.
 Munday 3 Septemb. we got some refreshment for our souldiers, which was no sooner done, but news was brought to us, that the enemy was within halfe a mile of the Town, which proved to be true, for presently one rid downe to us having his horse shot in the neck all bloody, and told us the enemy was at the towns end; also one Trooper slaine a quarter of a mile above the town, one of our souldiers stript him, and brought his clothes to us: It was a little open Village, the enemy might have come in upon us every way, therefore we conceiving it not safe to abide in the town, drew up our Regiment presently in a body, and marched into a broad open field to the top of the hil, the blew Regiment of the train'd Bands were quartered within lesse than half a mile of us, but came not up to us: Being come into the field we saw about 4 or 5000 of the enemies horse surrounding of us, one rid post to my Lord Generall to informe him of it. One great body of their horse stood facing of us upon the top of the hill at our townes end, within lesse than a quarter of a mile from us, another great body of their horse was in the valley, upon our right flank as we stood; and a third great squadron of their horse were going up to the top of a hill, in the reere of us; by all which it appeares, they had an intent to have surrounded our City Regiment, and to have cut us off; we stood and faced one another for the space of halfe an houre; then 6, or 7. of our men who had horses, rod up to them and came within lesse then musket shot, florishing their swords, daring them, and one or two of our men fired upon their forlorne hope: we had lyned the hedges with musketeers, which they perceiving did not move towards our body, but only stood and faced us. Then some of the Auxiliary forces came up to us, at whose coming we gave a great shout: and then by and by after we saw my Lord Generals forces comming down the hill about a mile and halfe behind us: my Lord drevv out the forlorn hope upon the hil as they came dovvn; who fired 3 or 4. Drakes against the enemies horse that were neer them on the top of the hil, that were coming upon the reer of us, and made them retreat to the rest of the body their intent was to have compassed us in on every side, but the Lord prevented them, they might have spoiled our whole Regiment, had they in the morning come down upon us when we were taking a little food to refresh our selves, the enemy being then but a half a mile off; a great many of the Cavaliers lay all night, within lesse then a mile of us, which we perceived in our march the next day, I hope the mercy of that day, wil not bee forgotten.
 When this was done, my L. Generals forces marched up to our Brigade: when they were come we drew forth our Forlorn hope, and marched up to the body of their Horse that stood facing us on the top of the hill: we fired some Drakes at them, they retreated: then the Lord Generall drew up his great Guns, they faced us againe, we fired two great Peeces of Ordnance at them, and then they retreated up to the Towne of Stow, and drew up all their horse into a body, and stood upon the side of the hill facing us: then we let flye two or three of our greatest Ordnance at them; they all fled, and wee pursued them and followed them three miles: Then they stood and faced the Lord Generall againe about the going downe of the Sun, we fired at them a great while, marching up towards them five or sixe Regiments together; all in a body, about 800 or 1000 abrest, sixe deep we having roome enough, it being a brave champian country: which goodly shew did so much the more daunt the enemy, that (as it is reported) Prince Rupert swore, hee thought all the Round-heads in England were there.
 In the first Skirmish we lost but one man, who was slaine by our owne Cannon through his owne negligence, and another sore burnt and hurt by the same Peece. When we came to Stow, the Cavaleers reported that they had killed twenty of our men, and we two of theirs; but we heare there were sixe of their men slaine, some horses killed, and five prisoners taken. Prince Rupert was there, and some say the Lord of Holland also. Our men pursuing them skirmished till nine of the clocke at night; wee marched after them till twelve of the clocke at night: we lay all in the open field upon the plowd-land, without straw, having neither bread nor water, yet God enabled our Souldiers to undergoe it cheerfully, there was not one feeble sick person amongst us, but was able to march with us the day following.
 Tuseday September 25. we advanced from that field neare to a Towne called Prestbury, withing sight of Glocester, about seven miles from it: This day the whole Army marching together, it fell to our red Regiment of the Trained-bands to march in the Reare of the Waggons, and had charge of them: about sixe of the clocke the Lord Generall comming to the top of a high mountaine or hill, called Presbury-hill, where we might see the City of Glocester, he commanded foure or five great Peeces of Ordnance to be fired; some say it was against the Cavaleers, who were about a mile off, in the Towne below the hill: others say it was to give intelligence to Glocester of our approaching to their reliefe. The Army marched downe the hill, and hastened to the adjacent Villages for Quarter, but before the Waggons could come to the top of the hill, night drawing on it began to be very darke, so that our Waggons and Carriages could not get downe the hill, many of them were overthrowne and broken, it being a very craggy steep and dangerous hill, so that the rest of the Waggons durst not adventure to goe downe, but stayed all night there: sixe or seven horses lay dead there the next morning that were killed by the overthrow of the Waggons: our red Regiment having charge of the Waggons, were constrained to lye all night upon the top of this mountaine, it being a most terrible tempestuous night of winde and raine, as ever men lay out in, we having neither hedge nor tree for shelter, nor any sustenance of food, or fire: we had by this time marched sixe daies with very little provision; for no place where we came was able to releeve our Army, we leaving the Rode all the way and marching through poore little villages: our souldiers in their marching this day would run halfe a mile or a mile before, where they heard any water was such straits and hardship our Citizens formerly knew not; yet the Lord that called us out to doe his worke enabled us to undergoe such hardnesse as hee brought us to. This evening the Lord Generall was faine to fight for his Quarter, and beat the enemy out of it, at a market-Towne called Cheltnam, five miles from Glocester, and two miles from this hill; about midnight we had two Alarms upon this hill, in the midst of all the storme and raine, which together with the darknesse of the night made it so much the more dreadfull, which also caused a great distraction among our Souldiers, every one standing upon his guard, and fearing his fellow Souldier to bee his enemy. Many other particular sad stories of this tempestuous stormy night I leave to the relation of others: one young man of the Colonels company was shot in this confusion upon this hill, whose death will be much lamented by his Parents and Friends, from whom he received a Letter but a few dayes before to returne home.
 The next morning, being Wednesday Sept. 26. our Souldiers came downe from that hill into the village aforesaid, being wet to the very skin, but could get little or no refreshing every house being so full of Souldiers: The Cavaleers were in the Towne but the day before. Wee stayed here but two or three houres that morning, and then wee had an Alarm that the Cavaleers were neere the Towne with a great body of horse: We were all presently drawne up into a body in the field; our souldiers began to complaine pitifully, being even worn out and quite spent for want of some refreshing, some complaining they had not eat or drunke in two dayes, some longer time. Yesterday the enemy raised their siege from before Glocester: this day our two Regiments of the Trained Bands marched to a little village called Norton, three miles wide of Glocester, and foure miles from Teuxbury, where our Souldiers had some reasonable accommodation and refreshment: in this village wee had many Alarms: we continued here two dayes and two nights.
 Thursday Sept. 7. the Kings forces fell upon some of our troops of horse at Winscombe, they being secure, the enemy killed many of them, and tooke many prisoners, and some Colours: the Regiments of our horse there did belong to Col. Vere and Col. Goodwin. The Auxiliary Regiments were quartered within two miles where this was done. This night about seven of the clock there came a command for our Regiments of the Trained-bands to march five miles back againe in the night but it being a very darke night, and our men worne out and spent with their former marching, they refused to goe; but next morning, being Friday Sept. 8. we had a command to march into Gloucester, which accordingly we did: The Lord Generall with the whole Army marched into Glocester this day.
 The Citie was exceeding full of horse and foote: the enemy besieged this Towne a full moneth and three dayes. They had many strong assaults against it, and battered some of their workes; & in two or three places they had begun to undermine the gates, and out-workes, but were met with by the Citie forces, who did undermine within to meet them: without they shott many granadoes of great weight, which when they fell in the Citie were red as fire; yet blessed be God, kild not one man therewith; onely tore up the ground as if a Beare had been rooting up the earth: The Inhabitants of the Citie report that the enemy shot 140 shot great and small in one day, and yet killed neither man woman nor childe; they lost but about thirtie in this Citie during the time of this siege; most of which, as is reported, were shot in the head, in peeping through some holes at the enemy; wee found very loving respect and entertainment in this Citie, they being very joyfull of our coming; wee abode here fryday-night and Saturday, and marched away on Sabbath-day-morning: the Lord Generall left in this Citie three great pieces of Ordnance, as also many score barrells of powder, with match and bullet proportionable, furnishing them to their hearts desire. 
Sabbath day Septemb. 10. the whole army advanced from Glocester to Tewksburie, where wee abode foure dayes and five nights, till Glocester had provided themselves of corne and other provisions: the enemy had cut off from the Citie all their pipes of water, and burnt their Mills: My Lord Generall summoned this Towne of Tewksbury, and demanded the twentieth part of their estate for the reliefe of Glocester. Wee were at this Towne five dayes, from Sabbath day till fryday Septemb. 15. On thursdaynight the enemy did fall upon some of our troopes of horse, who were quartered about three miles from Tewksbury, of the regiment belonging to Sir James Ramsey, they slew many of our men, and took many others prisoners. Wee took foure of them prisoners; but the greatest losse was sustained on our side. Before wee marched from this Towne, the Lord Generall gave order for the making of a bridge over the River Severne neere Tewksbury, as if our intention had been to march with our army over there to Worcester; which caused the enemy to draw their forces thither, as a place of refuge: The wisdome and policie of the Lord Generall and Counsell of warre, as also their great care for the preservation of our Army, is highly to be commended and never to be forgotten; and may serve to stop the mouths of all such as shall hereafter be opened against him: for had the enemy knowne which way we had marched, they might have had us at a great advantage, by gaining the hills; wee being now in the vale of Esum, and all our great Ordnance and Carriages to be drawn up those hills, they might have kept us there all this winter, & starved our army: but blessed be God, we all marched away with safetie. One that was present at Esum, where the King with his Army lay, affirmes that when tydings came to the King that wee were marched from Tewksbury, they did stamp and swear and curse their Scouts exceedingly, that they gave them no better intelligence of our departure. And the same day we marched from Tewksbury the King with his Army and traine of Artillery marched from Esum after us, as will appeare in the ensuing matter.
 Fryday Septemb. 15. our whole Army advanced from Tewksbury to Ciceter, aliàs Cirencister 17 miles we marched all night, and sate down before it about three aclock in the morning: when we came thither Sir Robert Pye marched up to the Towne, and with some Muskettiers he gave fire upon the Centinells, killed one of them, and wounded the other; Sir Robert himself received a shot in the arme: the Cavaliers yeelded the town and desired quarter: wee took 225. prisoners, whereof 10. were Commanders, we tyed them two and two together with Match, and brought them along with us: we took also 27 waggon-load of provision, which the Cavaliers had provided for the reliefe of their own Army: they had taken the School-house, belonging to the Towne, and made it their store-house, to lay in such provision as they made in the Countrey to bring in: they slew one man of ours, who was pistold by one that took him prisoner: we killed 2. or 3. of them.
 Saturday Septemb. 16. we advanced from Ciceter five miles to a village called Letton, where our London-Briggade was quartered that night; the Lord Generall with his Army quartered a mile further at a Market-towne in Wiltshire called Cricklet; at the village aforesaid were ten cart-load of Cavaliers, who were sick and lame, and brought thither to be quartred, who when they heard we were marching to this place, they then found their leggs and run away: this day we had a wet march, and in the night a false alarm.
 Sabbath day Septemb. 17. we marched from Cricklet to a Market-towne called Swindowne 8 miles. This morning newes was brought that the Cavaliers were come to Ciceter, and had taken and kild many of our men, who stayed behind drinking and neglecting to march with their Colours, who are not much to be pittied: this day we drove along with our army about 1000 sheep and 60 head of Cattell, which were taken from Malignants and Papists in the Country for the maintenance of our army: 87 sheep was allotted for our red Regiment, but wee afterwards lost them all, when we came to fight; it being every mans care then to secure himselfe, and to see to the safetie of the Army: this night our London-Briggade was quartred 2 miles beyond the Lord Generalls quarters at a little poore village called Chizelton, where wee could get no accommodation either for meat or drink, but what we brought with us in our snapsacks: most of us quartred in the open feild, it being a very cold frosty night, wee marched away hence the next morning.
 Munday Septemb. 18. we advanced from this village about two miles to a place called Abern-chase, where newes was brought to the Lord Generall, that the enemy was coming upon us with a great body of horse, which caused the Lord Generall to make a stand, our whole Army being in a deep valley, and the enemy upon the hills on our left flank, we drew up all our Army into a body to the top of the hill, where we had a full view of the enemy over against us: there appeared a great body of their horse; it was conceived there was 7 or 8000 but no foot that we could discerne; we stood a while and faced them; then one small body of horse as a forlorn hope marched up the hill to them, and fired upon them, and then retreated to their main body in the valley; the enemy followed our horse in their retreat, firing at them all the way very feircely; then we fired some Drakes at their horse, but did little execution; then our body of foot was drawne downe from this hill to the top of another high hill, where we stood and faced the enemy, having a full view of all that was don between our horse and theirs: our foot were not ingaged at all in this fight, except two Regiments onely: Then Collonell Meldrams and Colonell Harvies troops drew up in a body & gave the enemy a very feirce charge, which was performed with as brave courage and valour as ever men did, and then wheeled about to a Regiment of our foot that stood in the reer of them, the enemy pursued them in their retreat, skirmishing one at another all the way: what number was slain in this fight is not yet known: here Cap. Willet received a shot from the enemy, of which wound he is since dead: we lost no other man of note in this fight: one man of great note and esteem of the enemies partie was here slaine, Marquesse de la Veel, his father is Lord high Marshall of France, and chiefe Commander in the feild: we took up his body and carried it to Hungerford; I viewed his wounds, he received three shot in his body from us, one in his right pap, another in the shoulder, and a third in the face: from this place all their horse gathered into a body when it begun to be dark, and so ours likewise, and wee marched away that night to Hungerford 5 miles: our red Regiment with some other Regiments were quartred a mile on this side Hungerford, at a little village called Skelton; those that marched in the reer of the Army, were marching this 5 miles all night: we were much distressed for want of sleep, as also for all other sustenance; it was a night of much raine, we were wet to the skin: this day we took 25 Cavaliers at Hungerford, whereof one was slaine.
 Tuesday, Septemb. 19 we advanced from Hungerford to a village called Embry, about a mile and halfe from Nubury: the Lord Generall had intent to have quartered at Nubury that night, but the King got into the Town that day before, and so we were prevented. This morning a Trumpetter came from the King to the Lord Generall, to desire that Chyrurgions and Doctors might have free accesse from them to the Marquesse that we had taken. But the Messenger came to late: for the Marquesse was past their cure. The Lord Generall told him, if they pleased to send for his body, they might have it. The death of this Marquesse hath much inraged the enemy, being one whom they did highly esteem. This night our whole Army quartered in the open field; we had no provision but what little every one had in his Snapsack. We had now marched many dayes and nights with little food, or any sustenance, and little sleep. This night the King sent a challenge to the Lord Generall, to give him battell the next morning, which accordingly was performed; and in the night our enemies gained the hills where they intended to give us battell, they planted their Ordnance, got all advantages they could desire, before our Army marched up to them: Yet now wee see there is neither wisedome, nor policie, nor strength, against the Lord; yea, had not the Lord himselfe been on our side, they had swallowed us up quick, so great was their rage and fury stirred up against us, they being confident of the victory before we came to fight: But let not him that puts on his harnesse boast as he that puts it off. For it was not our owne arme that saved us, but the right hand of the Lord became glorious in that day, to get himselfe a glorious name.
 The next morning, Septem. 20. very early before day, we had drawn up all our Army in their severall Regiments, and marched away by break of day; and then advancing towards the enemy with most cheerfull and couragious spirits: The Lord Roberts souldiers had begun to skirmish with them before we came up to the enemy; which we hearing, put us to a running march till wee sweat again, hastening to their reliefe and succour. When wee were come up into the field, our two Regiments of the trained Bands were placed in open Campania upon the right wing of the whole Army. The enemy had there planted 8 pieces of Ordnance, and stood in a great body of Horse and Foot, wee being placed right opposite against them, and far lesse then twice Musket shot distance from them. They began their battery against us with their great Guns, above halfe an houre before we could get any of our Guns up to us; our Gunner dealt very ill with us, delaying to come to us: our noble Colonell Tucker fired one peece of Ordnance against the enemy, and aiming to give fire the second time, was shot in the head with a Cannon bullet from the enemy. The blew Regiment of the trained Bands stood upon our right wing, and behaved themselves most gallantly. Two re&rehy;giments of the Kings Horse which stood upon their right flanke a far off, came fiercely upon them, and charged two or three times, but were beat back with their Muskettiers, who gave them a most desperate charge, and made them flie. This day our whole Army wore green boughes in their hats, to distinguish us from our enemies; which they perceiving, one regiment of their Horse had got green boughes, & rid up to our regiments crying, Friends, friends; but we let flie at them, and made many of them and their horses tumble, making them flie with a vengeance. The enemies Canon did play most against the red Regiment of trained Bands, they did some execution amongst us at the first, and were somewhat dreadfull when mens bowels and brains flew in our faces: But blessed bee God that gave us courage, so that we kept our ground, and after a while feared them not, our Ordnance did very good execution upon them: for we stood at so neer a distance upon a plain field, that we could not lightly misse one another: We were not much above halfe our Regiments in this place; for we had 60 Files of Muskettiers drawn off for the forlorn hope, who were ingaged against the enemy in the field upon our left Fank. Where most of the Regiments of the Army were in fight, they had some small shelter of the hedges and bankes, yet had a very hot fight with the enemy, & did good execution, and stood to it as bravely as ever men did. When our two regiments of the trained Bands had thus plaied against the enemy for the space of three hours, or thereabout, our red Regiment joyned to the Blew which stood a little distance from us upon our left Flank, where we gained the advantage of a little hill, which we maintained against the enemy halfe an hour: two Regiments of the enemies foot fought against us all this while to gain the hill, but could not. Then two regiments of the enemies horse, which stood upon our right Flank, came fiercely upon us, and so surrounded us, that wee were forced to charge upon them in the front and reere, and both Flanks, which was performed by us with a great deal of courage and undauntednesse of spirit, insomuch that wee made a great slaughter among them, and forced them to retreat; but presently the two regiments of the enemies foot in this time gained the hill, and came upon us before wee could well recover our selves, that we were glad to retreat a little way into the field, till we had rallied up our men, and put them into their former posture, and then came on again. If I should speak any thing in the praise and high commendations of these two regiments of the trained Bands, I should rather obscure and darken the glory of that courage and valour God gave unto them this day, they stood like so many stakes against the shot of the Cannon, quitting themselves like men of undaunted spirits, even our enemies themselves being judges. It might be expected that something should be spoken of the noble and valiant service performed by the rest of the Regiments of the Army both horse and foot; but their courage & valour it self speaks, which was performed by them that day, our men fighting like Lions in every place, the great slaughter made amongst the enemies testifies. My noble and valiant Captaine George Massie, who was with the forlorn hope, received a shot in the back from the enemy, of which wound he is since dead. This 26. of September (hinc illae lachrymae) we lost about 60 or 70 men in our red Regiment of the trained Bands, besides wounded men, we having the hottest charge from the enemies Cannon of any regiment in the Army. Also that worthy and valiant Gentleman Capt. Hunt was slain in this battell, whose death is much lamented. These two poore regiments were the very objects of the enemies battery that day, and they have since made their boast of it. It is conjectured by most, that the enemy lost four for one: 70. chief Commanders were slain on their side. This is most certain certaine, that they did acknowledge themselves to be beaten. It is credibly informed by those that were this day in the Kings army, that the King himself brought up a regiment of Foot and another of horse into the field, and gave fire to two peeces of Ordnance, riding up and down all that day in a souldiers gray coat. The next day I viewed the dead bodies: there lay about 100 stript naked in that field where our 2 regiments stood in battalia. This night the enemy conveyed away about 30. cart load of maimed and dead men, as the towne-people credibly reported to us, and I think they might have carried away 20 cart load more of their dead men the next morning; they buried 30 in one pit, 14 lay dead in one ditch: this battaile continued long; it begun about six aclock in the morning, and continued till past 12 aclock at night: in the night the enemy retreated to the towne of Newbury, and drew away all their Ordnance; we were in great distresse for water, or any accommodation to refresh our poore Souldiers, yet the Lord himselfe sustained us that we did not faint under it; we were right glad to drink in the same water where our horses did drink, wandering up and downe to seek for it. Our word this day was Religion, theirs was Queen Mary in the field: The great goodnesse of God, in giving us victory this day is so much the more remarkable from these three considerations: First, that great disadvantage we had this day, in case we had been beat by the enemy, we having no place of retreat for safety neerer then Glocester, which was above 30 miles: whereas our enemies had possession of Newbury, and in a manner of the whole Countrey round about: secondly, we had great scarcitie of provision for our Army, having marched many dayes and nights with little food or sleep, or any refreshment; had not God fed us with the bread of our enemies which we took at Ciceter, we could not without a speciall providence of God have been able to subsist, whereas our enemies had the town of Newbury, and the Country all about for their relief. Thirdly, we had a great disadvantage by giving battell in that place the enemy had made choice of their ground, planted their Ordnance, gained all advantages they could desire. Beside many other disadvantages on our part, which I forbeare to relate; yet God gave us the victory, and made our enemies flie before us, that we kept the field all night. The Lord Generall deserves perpetuall honor by his wise, valiant, and worthy managing of this dayes battle, as also no lesse praise and commendation to the rest of the councel of war. Many more particular passages might here be inserted, but I proceed. 
Thursday, Sept. 21. after we had buried our dead, we marched frõ this field with our whole army to a town called the Veal, 11 miles, and 4 miles from Redding; where in our march this day, our enemy pursuing of us, fell upon our reer in a narrow lane about a mile and a halfe from a village called Aldermason, they came upon us with a great body of foot and horse: our London Briggade marched in the reer, and a forlorn hope of 600 Muskettiers in the reere of them, besides a great number of our horse: but our horse which brought up our reere, durst not stand to charge the enemy, but fled running into the narrow lane, routed our own foot, tampling many of them under their horse feet, crying out to them, Away, away, every man shift for his life, you are all dead men; which caused a most strange confusion amongst us. We fired 10 or 12 Drakes at the enemy, but they came upon us very feircely, having their foot on the other side of the hedges; many of our waggons were overthrowne and broken: others cut their traces and horse-harnesse, and run away with their horses. leaving their waggons & carriages behind them: our foot fired upon the enemies horse very bravely, and slew many of them; some report above 100 and not 10 of ours: some that we took prisoners our men were so inraged at them that they knockt out their braines with the butt-end of their Muskets: in this great distraction and rout a waggon of powder lying in the way overthrowne some spark of fire or match fell among it, which did much hurt; 7 men burnt and 2 kild: the enemy had got 2 of our drakes in the reer, had not our foot played the men and recovered them againe: this was about 4 or 5 aclock at night; many of our men lost their horses, and other things which they threw away in haste: wee marched on and came to the Veal about 10. aclock at night.
 Fryday Sept. 22 we advanced from the Veal and came to Reading foure miles, where we refreshed our Souldiers after our hard service and wearisome marchings. We stayed here fryday saterday and sabbath day: saterday night about 20 of the enemies horse came and gave us an alarm. Sabbath day was celebrated a day of thanksgiving; we marched away hence on munday morning.
 Monday Sept. 25. wee advanced from Reading to Madenhead, our Briggade was quartred here. But the Lord Generall with his Army and all his train marched to Windsor.
 Tuesday Sept. 26. we advanced from Maidenhead about 4 aclock in the morning, having some intentiõ of marching to London that night, but came no farther then Brainford, where we stayed the next day also being Fast day.
 Thursday, Sept. 28. we marched from Brainford to London, where we were joyfully received home of all our friends, and all that wish well to the Parliament; and to the vexation of heart of all wicked malignants who had raised reports that we were all routed and slaine: the Lord Mayor together with the Aldermen of the Citie met us at Temple-barr, and entertained us joyfully: many 1000 bidding us wellcome home, and blessing God for our safe returne: Thus God that called us forth to doe his worke, brought us through many straits, dilivered us from the rage and insolency of our adversaries, made them turne their backs with shame, giving us victory, and causing us to return home joyfully.
 Monoi Theoi doxa
 FINIS. 
