THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Actions OF GUSTAVUS VASA, Deliverer of his Country.Recommended to the Spectators of a Tragedy on that Subject, now in Rehearsal at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane. Extracted from the best HISTORIANS.------------LONDON: Printed for J. Roberts in Warwick-Lane. 1739. Price Sixpence.
------------THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Actions OF GUSTAVUS VASA, Deliverer of his Country.UNderstanding a Play call'd Gustavus Vasa, was preparing for the Publick, I had the Curiosity to attend a Friend of the Author's to the Rehearsal at the Theatre-Royal in DruryLane: But as Praise often raises to Adulation, I was in some Fear (like a Lover's warm Description of the Charms of his Mistress) it would fall short to one prepared for the strictest Examination: I went, not in the least prejudiced in its Favour, but was extremely surprised to find my self so agreeably Disappointed.
There is not only what the Actors call Business in it, but a Nobleness of Stile and Thoughts, that has in my Opinion rank'd it in the Class of the best Tragick Authors.
I therefore went Home, full of the noble Ideas the Piece had stamp'd on my Mind, and form'd a Resolution of extracting from the Best Historians, the Life and History of this Northern Hero, GUSTAVUS VASA.
THE Kingdom of  Sweden (Sweden, which contains a great Part of the old Scandinavia, is one of the most powerful Kingdoms in the North, for many Ages united to the Crown of Denmark. The Air is very cold, tho' far more fertil than any of the other Northern Kingdoms. It equals France and Spain in its Extent. Their chief Export is Malt, Barley, Brass, Lead, Steel, Iron, Buck and Great Hides, Black Cattle, Variety of Rich Furs, Tar, Honey, Oaks and Deals, and the finest Copper in the World. The Inhabitants, healthful and strong, (the Women more prolifick than any of its bordering Nations) and so industrious, that there is seldom a Beggar seen among them. This Kingdom was converted to Christianity in the Year 816, by Ansgarus Bishop of Bremen (a City of the Lower-Saxony.) Norway and Lapland bound its North, Russia and Moscovy the East; the South by the Baltick Sea, and the West, Denmark. This Kingdom was the Country of the Goths, who made a Breach in the Roman Empire, the fourth Century, to let in most of the Northerns that now inhabit it. The Swedes are well made, and are Warriors from their Infancy; they are patient in Hunger and Want, having more Courage than Industry, taking more Pleasure and Delight to polish their Arms, than improve their Commerce; leaving to their Women the Cares of the Houshold. It extends from South to North, to the 55th Degree of Latitude to the 70th, and consequently must feel the Cold in its utmost Rigour. The Winter Season reigns near nine Months of the Year; and in their three Summer Months their Tillage, their Harvest, their Fruit and Vegetables come to their Perfection. But in the nine Winter Months, Providence has been kind to them, by allowing them a serene Sky and a pure Air; and the light of the Moon, which is very seldom obscur'd, makes it almost as commodious in Travelling by Night, as by Day.) was an Elective Kingdom till the fourteenth Century, and by that Right, the Swedes, often depos'd their Monarchs when they had the least view of infringing their Liberties.
The King could neither raise Money, declare Peace or War, without the Consent of the Senate, nor build any Fortifications. The Representatives of the Kingdom were the Nobility, the Bishops, and Deputies of Towns, nay even the Peasants were at last incorporated into that Assembly.
About the Year 1692, this warlike Nation that had conquered Rome above thirteen Centuries past, was subdu'd and brought under Subjection by a Woman, Margaret Queen of Denmark and Norway: But after the Death of that heroick Queen, Sweden often felt the Shocks of Civil Wars, alternately shook off the Danish Yoke, and submitted to it, was sometimes govern'd by Kings, and somtimes by Administrators.
About the Year 1520, this Kingdom was oppress'd by two terrible Tyrants, Christiern, the Second King of Denmark, a Monster in Nature, cloath'd in every Vice, and Trollio, Archbishop of  Upsal (Upsal was formerly the Capital of Sweden, in the Province of Upland, constituted an Archbishop's See by Eugenius the Third Pope of Rome. It is seated on the River Sala. It was for many Ages the Seat of their Kings, and from its former Regard the Kings receive their Regalities there, and are crown'd by the Archbishop of that Place; 'tis also an University.). These two wellmatch'd Tyrants agreed to seize in one Day at  Stockholm (Stockholm. The now Capital of all Sweden, (and has been so two Centuries and upward) is a large, noble City (tho' formerly a poor Place) Seated upon the Bottom of the Lake Meler, that falls into the Sea near this City: It is almost surrounded by Rocks, and strongly fortified, its Situation is something like that of Venice, upon six Islands join'd to each other by six wooden Bridges, with two large Suburbs, one to the North, and the other to the South. In their Cathedral are deposited two of their Kings (the rest being interr'd at Upsal.) Its Castle is large but not strong, and the Harbour one of the safest in the North, for once enter'd, you are intirely land-lock'd, and defended by the circumjacent Rocks, from all Gust, or Flaws of Wind.), the Magistrates, the Consuls, and ninety four Senators, who all suffer'd Death, under Pretence that they were excommunicated by the Pope, for defending the Rights of the State against the Archbishop, whilst these two Tyrants were employed in the utmost Exercise of arbitrary Power.
Gustavus Vasa, (the Subject of our noble Drama) was lineally descended from their famous King Canutson, he was one of those extraordinary Genius's, who are so rarely form'd by Nature, to govern Mankind; his Person was amiable, his Air majestick, his Eloquence, which receiv'd an additional Force from the agreeableness of his manner, was the more persuasive, as it was less artful. His enterprizing Genius form'd such noble Designs, as might appear rash to vulgar Souls, he was intrepid with Prudence, calm in an Age of Cruelty and Horror, and as virtuous, as the most guiltless.
The first Appearance of this great Hero, was under Steno, the Administrator (so the Chief was called.) His force of Eloquence, and Reason, insensibly crept into the Heart of Steno; by Gustavus's persuasion, he arm'd the Peasants with Fire-arms, who before that time us'd no Instruments of War, but Bows and Arrows. The first Proof of his invincible Courage, was at the Battle of  Wedel (Wedel a strong, but small Fortification in Sweden, facing the Baltick.), against Christiern's Army. He was the first that broke their Ranks at the Head of Steno's Horse, and to his visible Courage and Conduct the Victory was owing. Most of the Danes were cut to Pieces, and the remaining few made a disorderly retreat to their Vessel, not thinking themselves secure till their safe arrival in Denmark.
After this Success, Gustavus led his victorious Troops to beleaguer  Steque (Steque, a strong Castle in the Province of Upsal.), where the Archbishop was fortify'd. The Troops commanded by Gustavus, under the King, carry'd their Works to the Foot of the Wall, but the furious Priest defended the Place with the greatest Vigour, contrary to the opinion of the Garrison, who call'd for a Surrender, well knowing if they were taken by Storm, they wou'd be treated as Rebels, and Traitors to their Country.
The Archbishop, finding no Persuasions wou'd prevail on the Garrison to defend the Place, desir'd to treat with the Administrator at his Tent, demanding Gustavus shou'd enter the Castle as Hostage, which was comply'd with, but fearing the Administrator wou'd treat him as a Rebel, he left order with some of his Adherents, to hang up Gustavus over the Battlements of the Castle, if they saw he was detain'd as Prisoner: But Steno declaring he wou'd leave his Trial to the Senate, (the Priest imagin'd he had Friends enough to vote him not Guilty) the Castle was surrender'd, and he went on his Journey to Stockholm, with such a proud State and Equipage, as if he had triumph'd over the Enemies of his Country, imagining the dread of Christiern wou'd prevent even his Trial; but he was much deceiv'd, for on his arrival, the Senate proceeded to his Trial with the utmost Vigour, and he was condemn'd to retire from the World, to lead a private Life, first forfeiting all his Dignities.
In the Month of May (1518) Christiern prepar'd for another Invasion of Sweden, and in June besieg'd Stockholm, but the Garrison and Inhabitants having an intire hatred for the Danes, resolv'd to defend it to the last Man. Every Foot of Ground the Besiegers gained, cost 'em the Lives of Hundreds.
The Administrator, having assembled and disciplin'd his Troops, proceeded with long Marches, to attack the Army of the King of Denmark, who fearing, between the Army and the City, he shou'd be overpower'd, rais'd the Siege precipitantly, and march'd towards his Ships, but Gustavus with the Swedish Horse, fell like Thunder on their Rear, kill'd the third part of the Besiegers, pressing many into the Sea, who perished there; made above three hundred of their Officers Prisoners, who oppos'd him to give their King time to escape: Yet this fatal Retreat, was not the last of their Misfortunes, the very Winds prov'd their Enemies, blowing full three Months against 'em, which prevented their sailing to Denmark, and their Provisions falling short, they were forc'd thro' Necessity to land in Troops for Subsistance. But their Guardian Angel Gustavus, watching for the good of Sweden, was ever among those that landed, and reliev'd the Wants of many of the Danes, by Death with his Sword, who flew before him like fearful Pigeons from the Hawk.
Christiern being drove to the utmost Necessity sought for a Truce, and beg'd for an Interview with the Administrator, on board his Fleet, but the Senate wou'd not agree to it, well knowing the Dissimulation of the King of Denmark, who, indeed intended, if he had prevailed on him to come on Board to have made him Prisoner.
Failing in this, he thought of another Stratagem: he imagin'd if he cou'd get Gustavus, and some other young Lords into his Custody, it wou'd prevail upon Steno, to come to any Terms, or if he refus'd, wou'd at least cause Disturbances and Factions among the Friends of these Noblemen, and draw him to his Ends that way. He therefore agreed to meet Steno, and the Senate in Stockholm, upon Condition, Gustavus, and six young Lords that he wou'd name, shou'd remain on Board his Ship as Hostages.
Gustavus, and the young Lords that were chose by the Danish King, cheerfully comply'd; when they came to the Shore-side, the Admiral of the Danes, attended by several Officers, landed to salute 'em, while they were in Conference, the Hostages were surrounded with Soldiers disguis'd like Mariners. In the mean time, the King of Denmark descending to his Boat, in order to come on Shore, the Admiral invited Gustavus and the rest on board his Boat, to meet his Master, and salute him.
Gustavus, tho' too late, perceiv'd the Treachery against the Law of Nations, yet went with his Companions cheerfully into the Admiral's Boat, well knowing Resistance wou'd be vain. When they came on Board, they were brought before the King, who order'd them to be disarm'd, and sent a Message to Steno, who declar'd in his Master's Name, their Heads shou'd be struck off, unless the Archbishop was restor'd to his former Dignities, &c. Steno, and the Swedes were so incens'd at this Indignity and Treachery that they hurry'd on Board their small Vessels with their Arms, either to recover their Hostages, or die in the Attempt. But Christiern, with the help of fair Wind, that rose that Morning, was sail'd for Denmark, and the generous Swedes were oblig'd to return regretting with Tears the loss of Gustavus and his Companions.
The Danish King left no means unattempted to corrupt the Fidelity of Gustavus and his Companions, but in vain. Their Resolution and Constancy had almost cost 'em their Lives, for dreading the Courage and Indignation of Gustavus, if he shou'd be releas'd, gave secret Orders to put him and the other Lords to Death. But the Dane who receiv'd that Order, abhorring so barbarous a Proceeding, or fearing, perhaps, the Law of Retaliation if by the Chance of War he shou'd fall into the Hands of the Swedes, took the liberty to tell his Master, that the Death of those illustrious Captives, wou'd be prejudicial to his Interest, but by detaining 'em Prisoners, he might keep their Relations in awe. These Considerations made so great an Impression on the Tyrant, that he contented himself with their Imprisonment in the Castle of  Copenhagen (Copenhagen is the Principal City of Denmark, in the Isle of Zeeland, great and well fortified; it is built upon a Plain near the Sea where is form'd a safe large and noble Harbour, commanded by a very strong Castle, over against Schonen (a Province in Sweden) on the Baltick.), where they were so cruelly us'd by his Order, that some of 'em expir'd under their Torments.
But Eric Banner one the Lords of Denmark, and a near Relation to Gustavus, who admir'd his Virtues, fearing his Life, won so much upon Christiern (by insinuating he did not doubt but he shou'd work him to his Interest) that he gave him to his Protection, on Condition if he made his Escape, he should pay for his Ransom six thousand Crowns of Gold (in those Times a great Sum.) The noble Banner did not think any Condition too hard to save his illustrious Kinsman. But notwithstanding the generous Treatment from him, Gustavus consider'd he was still a Slave, and cou'd not bear the Thoughts of being absent from the approaching War.
Christiern breath'd nothing but Destruction against Sweden, but his Coffers being low, he seiz'd a Million of Florins that the Legate Arumboldi, had gathered from the Sale of Indulgencies in Sweden, and Denmark, with the pretext, that the Legate held Correspondence with his Enemies in Sweden.
With this holy Mony, and much more drain'd from his unconsenting Subjects, he levy'd Men at home, and foreign Auxiliaries, with these he once more invaded Sweden with Fire and Sword, and other ungrateful attendances of War, under the conduct of Otho Crumpein, a valiant and experienc'd General. But we shall leave him to his Successes, and follow the illustrious Gustavus Vasa, or, the Deliverer of his Country that gives Title to our Play.
Gustavus was terribly alarm'd at the Ruin of his Country, (that had surrender'd to the King of Denmark, thro' the Success of his Arms under the conduct of victorious Otho, with the Death of Steno, (the Administrator, who lost his Life in a Battle with Otho.) His Restraint became insupportable to him: The passionate Love to his dear Country made him forget the affable Kindness of his generous Host, therefore he resolv'd upon his Escape, and in the Month of December (1519) under the pretence of Hunting (as he often did) he went out of the Castle where he was never confin'd, and in the Habit of a Peasant arriv'd in two Days, (thro' Woods and the most secret Byways) at Flensburgh, (Flensburgh, a City in Denmark on the Baltick Sea, in the Dukedom of Sleswick, it is a small, but strong City, built on very high Hills, with a safe and large Haven, defended by a strong Castle.) at that Place he hir'd himself as a Driver of Oxen, by which Device, he got clear of the Danish Dominions, and arriv'd safe at  Lubeck (Lubeck, a great and opulent City of the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of Holstein. It is one of the Principal Hans Towns, about three Miles from the Baltick, upon the River Trave. In this City the Peace was concluded between the Emperor, and King of Denmark in the Year (1629).). But all his Precaution cou'd not hide him from the searching Eyes of Banner, who found him at Lubeck. But Gustavus by his Eloquence convinc'd Banner that his seeming Ingratitude, was fatal Necessity, dismissed him with Promises of a grateful Memory for his noble Treatment.
Gustavus thro' many Difficulties, set his Foot once more on his dear native Country, full of civil Wounds, and with her loss of Liberty almost expiring. He discover'd himself to the Governor of  Calmar (Calmar, a strong City of Sweden upon the Baltick. It is the Port where the Swedes generally take Shipping for Germany. The Citadel is accounted the strongest in all Sweden. It stands overagainst the Isle of Ocland, (an Island in the Baltick belonging to Sweden, the Straits between this Island and Calmar, is call'd Calmar sund.) This City was taken, and all the Garrison, and Inhabitants put to the Sword by Christian the fourth King of Denmark in 1611, all but those who retir'd into the Citadel; but return'd to the Great Gustavus Adolphus by Treaty in (1613).), a German Garrison that held out for the Swedes, but his usual Eloquence was not heard by those mercenary Men, but they threaten'd to deliver him up to the King of Denmark, if they once admitted him within their Walls. Unprospering here, he was filled with Trouble and Vexation, and being inform'd there were several Parties of the Danes in quest of him, and dread of falling into the Hands of the relentless Christiern, he was oblig'd to conceal himself in a Cart loaded with Straw, and by that means was carry'd thro' the Danish Camp in safety to   Sudermania (Sudermania, a City and Castle that gives Name to the Province. Bounded on the North by Westmannia, and Upsal, two Provinces of Sweden, and on the South by the Baltick. It gives the Title of Duke to the Royal Family of Sweden. It is call'd by the Natives Sodermanland.), a Castle belonging to his Father, Eric Vasa. From that Place, he sent Circular Letters to his Friends, intreating 'em to summon their Vassals, and Followers, to have one more Struggle for their Lives, and (what was more precious to him,) their Liberties. But was discourag'd in the Attempt even by his own Relations.
This giving up their Liberty, fill'd his Mind with Disdain, Contempt, and Rage, therefore he apply'd himself to the hardy Peasants, but he found with unconsolable Regret, that even these that were so tenacious of their Liberty, gave over all thoughts on that Subject.
He then form'd a Resolution at all Hazards, to get within the Walls of Stockholm, whose Garrison held out that City for the Widow of their diseas'd Administrator the brave Steno. He travell'd mostly by Night, but the Danes having notice of his Journey, pursu'd him so close, that they came to the Place he had left an Hour before: Finding his Designs impracticable, he return'd by another Road, and took Shelter in a Convent of Carthusians, founded by his Ancestors; but the lazy Monks, fat'ning in Ease and Plenty, turn'd him out -- He then took Sanctuary with a Peasant formerly his Father's Servant. From thence, he once more by Letters to several of the Nobility, endeavour'd to rouze their sleeping Courage, and wake in their Souls the love of Liberty, but the Terror of the Danes kept 'em in awe. What had the Heroick Gustavus to do now, but patently to wait in Obscurity some happy Revolution.
The Danish King enter'd Sweden in the Spring (1525) confirm'd the Treaty of Upsal, and by Bribery prevail'd on the Governor of Calmar to surrender that important Place. Also sent to Steno's illustrious Widow, then residing at Stockholm, to surrender that City, but she return'd him his Heroic Answer, That she wou'd sooner suffer Death than surrender to the Enemy of her Country.
This Answer fix'd Christiern's Resolution of beleaguering that City. But the Garrison animated by her Presence, made a noble Defence: Yet Necessity began to appear with all its frightful Appendages, and that great Princess was at last oblig'd to accept of the Terms, tho' not altogether disadvantageous to her.
King Christiern, about this time surrender'd his Heart to the Charms of a Woman neither young nor handsome, but had so much cunning and wit to manage him, that she might be well call'd his chief Minister of State, disposing of Places and Offices as she pleas'd, to the Scandal of the King, and hurt of his Subjects; and by the Advice of her, and the Archbishop of Upsal, was brought on that horrid Massacre of the Bishops, the Senators, and most of the Nobility: But we will forget such an human Barbarity, and go in pursuit of our Illustrious Hero Gustavus.
Gustavus from his Secret Retreat, look'd round to seek for what he wish'd, and being inform'd of the Massacre, had hopes the Subject wou'd not long bear with such an inhuman Monster. Christiern had proscrib'd him, with a large Reward, therefore he did not think himself safe surrounded by Danes; besides the Loss of most of those Friends by the Massacre of the barbarous King of Denmark, his Father being one, gave him inexpressible Sorrow. Therefore he resolv'd to retire to the almost inaccessible Mountains of  Dalecarlia (Dalecarlia, a great Province in the Kingdom of Sweden near the Mountains of Savona, and Norway, which bound it on the West, on the North, Helsinga; Gestricia on the East, and Verlemandia on the South, a large Country, but it has not either a good City or Town, only Villages or Hamlets. This Province takes its Name from the River that runs through the Country, and is call'd Dalecarle, which is one of the largest Streams in the whole Kingdom of Sweden. This Province being so far from the Capital of Sweden, was governed by the Head of the Peasants, whose Habitations were chiefly on the Banks of the River Dalecarle, or the Skirts of their large Forests, Lakes, or other Streams that empty'd themselves into the River Dalecarle. The Elders of each Village were Captains, or Judges &c.).
Thus shrouded Excellence in the Disguise of a Peasant, pursu'd his uncomfortable Journey to these dreary Dwellings, attended only with a Guide that knew the Course of the Country, where meeting with many Difficulties, he arriv'd safe at that part of those Mountains, call'd by the Inhabitants Daalfield, a simple Village in Dalecarlia, bordering on the Copper Mines.
From this Place, our Author of the Play begins his Scene.
The Inhabitants of these Mines, and Mountains, set so high a Value on their Liberty, that no King, or Substitute, ever enter'd their Country without giving Pledges to the People to maintain their Rights and Privileges; even the Tribute they paid in Token of Allegiance, was a small Number of Furs. He was no sooner enter'd this mountainous Country, but his treacherous Guide forsook him and at the same time robbed him of what little Money he had. This brought our Hero to such Distress, that Necessity obliged him to enter as a Servant in the Copper Mines, where he earn'd his Subsistence by the Sweat of his Brows. But notwithstanding his Care to conceal himself, he was found out by a Woman of the Village where he lodg'd, by observing a silk Robe embroidered with Gold, in his Apartment where he lay. Women can't keep Secrets, therefore this News came to the Chief of the Village: This Chief had been with Gustavus in his Youth, at the University of Upsal, therefore as soon as he saw him, he knew him for Gustavus. He offer'd him the Accommodation of his House, which our Hero accepted of, in the Hope he had of prevailing with him to assert his Country's Cause. This Chief's Discourse often tended that Way, but when Gustavus declared himself, he was sunk into base Fears and Tremblings. The Illustrious Wanderer, finding his Expectations frustrated, left the timorous Chief, and journeying alone thro' the pathless Woods, arriv'd at the Residence of Peterson, a Gentleman he was acquainted with in the Army.
This brave Spirit in appearance soon was rouz'd by the Eloquence of his noble Guest, but his base Intention was to make his Court to the King of Denmark, by betraying the Laws of Hospitality in surrendring his Illustrious Guest. He gave notice to one of the Danish Officers, who surrounded the House, but Gustavus, the Night before (by the means of the Traitor's Wife, inspir'd with Pity) made his Escape, where by her Directions, he arriv'd at a Curate's House, who was a sincere Lover of his Country, he conceal'd Gustavus in his Church unknown to any one Person, for fear of a Discovery.
This generous Curate, advis'd him once more to apply to the Peasants, at their Christmas Meeting, where the neighbouring Villagers assembled to examine their martial Power. He met the Peasants on the Day appointed (dress'd according to his Quality) who had Notice of his Visit. When he appear'd, his noble Air, and usual Eloquence penetrated the Hearts of these valiant Rusticks in his Behalf, who resolv'd to revenge the Death of their Nobles and Senate.
Our Hero took 'em while their Souls were warm, and led them by secret Paths in the Night to the Castle of the Province which they took by Scalade, and in their first Fury, put the Garrison to the Sword, all but the Governor, whom Gustavus saved with much Difficulty. The Sucess of this Enterprize gave the Dalecarlians great Opinion of their Leader, and in a few Days most of the Peasants of the Province listed under his Banner.
Several Swedish Gentlemen of Note, who were outlaw'd by Christiern, repair'd to him as a Sanctuary, and serv'd as Officers under him, to Discipline his rude Troops. The Provinces of  Helsingland (Helsingland, a Province of Sweden, between Dalecarle to the West, and Baltick to the East.),  Medelpadia (Medelpadia, another Province of Sweden, it is bounded by Helsingland on the South, Jempsland to the North, the Baltick Sea on the East, and Dalecarle on the West.),  Angermania (Angermania another Province in Sweden, between Medelpadia and Helsingland.),  Gestricia (Gestricia, by the Inhabitants called Gestrick, near the Bothner Sea to the East, the North by Helsingland, Dalecarlia on the West, and Uplandia on the South, famous for little but its Iron Mines.), and  Bothnia (Bothnia, another Swedish Province, on the Borders of Lapland. It gives Name to the Bothnian Sea.) revolted from the Danes and hail'd Gustavus as their Lord.
The News of this Revolt surpriz'd the Viceroy of Sweden, who was ill prepar'd for the Field. He acquainted the King of Denmark with this disagreeable News, and in the mean time summon'd his Army, to oppose this unlook'd for Torrent. Christiern the King of Denmark, began to be more tyrannous, if possible, than ever, exercising his Cruelty upon his own Subjects, and not being able to send Succours over to Sweden, he writ to his Viceroy to bring the Rebels as he call'd them to Reason. Threatning Gustavus at the same time, the Blood of his Mother and Sisters should be shed with the most exquisite Torments, if he did not abandon the Interest of Sweden.
But Gustavus, despising his Threats, march'd on with his victorious Army, now increas'd to fifteen thousand Men, all resolv'd from the Ardour of their General to conquer, or die.
The Viceroy advanc'd to the River Brunebec to oppose the Passage of Gustavus, but as soon as the Avenger of his Country appear'd on the other Side at the Head of his Horse, he abandon'd his Post, and took to a shameful Flight, leaving Part of his Army to garrison  Westeras (Westeras, the Capital City of the Province Westmania; this Province has Upland to the East, Gestricia to the North, Sudermania to the South, and Nericia to the West.), but did not think himself safe till begirt with the Walls of Stockholm. Gustavus lost no Time, but pass'd the River and march'd to the Siege of Westeras. He intrench'd himself near the Chapel of Stolaus with three thousand Foot only (having sent his Horse, and the remaining Part of his Foot, in order to execute a Stratagem) with all the Care and Diligence of a General that fears being attack'd, which the Danes perceiving, and observing the Smallness of their Number, sally'd and charg'd him with their Horse. Gustavus pretending to fly, he drew the pursuing Danes, into the Trap that was set for 'em. In short, the Danes were routed, and the City taken, by the Conduct, and Valour of the invincible Gustavus. But all had like to have been lost, by the Drunkenness of the Dalecarlians, who in plundering the City, found large quantities of Wine and Brandy, their beloved Liquors, that they were almost all bury'd in Drunkenness.
The Captain of the Citadel perceiving their Disorder, sally'd upon 'em, putting great Numbers to the Sword, and the City wou'd have been certainly retaken, had not the valorous Gustavus, with a few Officers barricaded a Street, while the drunken Soldiers were forced from the Cellars to oppose the Enemy, that fought boldly to regain the City.
The taking of Westeras seem'd to open the Gate to let in a total Revolution. Seventy Swedish Officers at one time came over to Gustavus, several Noblemen, among these was Aruide, a powerful Lord of  Westgothland. In short, the Eyes of all Sweden seem'd to look upon Gustavus as their Deliverer.
When he had block'd up the Citadel of Westeras, that the Garrison might not receive any Succours, he divided his Forces in three Bands, and sent 'em on several Expeditions, and by this means harrass'd the Danish Troops, who were oblig'd in the same manner to divide also.
Gustavus being inform'd, there was an Assembly of new Troops ready for his Command at Upsal, he immediately appear'd to head 'em. From that City, he sent an Envoy to the Consul of Lubeck, (who favour'd his Escape to Sweden) wherein his Letters gave a full account of his Success. These Mercantile Men were so wavering, that Gustavus's Envoy cou'd not fix 'em in any Point. But his Success with Stephen de Sassi, an old experienc'd German Colonel, a brave Soldier of Fortune, (who, for a Sum of Money down, and a promise of another certain, to land in Sweden with 1200 hardy Veterans the next August 1520) answer'd for the other failing Negotiation.
Trolio the artful Bishop was the most formidable Enemy Gustavus had, thro' his numerous Relations, and Adherents in Posts and Power by his means. Therefore Gustavus sent two Religious of his Party to persuade him (if possible) with large Promises to join in his Interest. But the haughty Priest contemn'd all Offers, and sent the two Canons in order to suffer Death at Stockholm, but by their Art, and giving an account of the Affairs of Gustavus they escap'd.
Trolio being inform'd by the two Priests that the Dalecarlians had left Gustavus to gather in their Harvest, and that he had but a hundred Horse, and six hundred Foot to defend Upsal, he resolv'd to attack him in that City, and march'd with such Secrecy, that he was within two Hours march before he had any notice of his Expedition; (Upsal being an unfortify'd City, and most of its Inhabitants being in Trolio's Interest, as being their Lord) he thought it Madness to defend the Place, therefore he march'd with his Horse at the Rear of his Foot, to the Forest of Nostan. But the Archbishop entering the City immediately after him, and being advis'd of his hasty retreat, pursued him with all his Army. The sight of Trolio's numbers frighten'd Gustavus's small Force, who instantly abandon'd their General. In the Fight, the 'Squire of Gustavus mounted on an unruly Horse run against him, and push'd his Master into the Water. But this Accident rais'd the Courage of our Hero, who with a small Number of his Guards, that wou'd never forsake him, sustain'd the Fight 'till his other Forces had gain'd the Shelter of the Forest, then maugre the Resistance of the Foe, he cut himself a Passage thro' 'em with the loss of ten of his Guards only, and safely came up with his little Army.
This Success over our great Gustavus, elevated the Archbishop in such a manner, as if he had gain'd an intire Victory over all his Enemies. But this Danger only serv'd to animate Gustavus to a greater height, if possible, therefore he breath'd nothing but Revenge! and in order to it, he gather'd all the Force he cou'd assisted by Colonel de Sassi, with his 1200 Germans, just then arriv'd, however he conceal'd his Numbers, and intrench'd himself, as if he had no other Forces, than what he made his hasty Retreat out of Upsal with, which the Archbishop thought beneath his notice, and march'd onward in a Triumphal manner towards Stockholm. Gustavus, foreseeing this, appointed Aruide to conceal himself in a bordering Wood on the Road, with some part of his Army, which unexpectedly fell furiously on the Archbishop, and destroy'd his Troops with great Slaughter. The haughty Priest to save his Men, thought to regain the City he had left, but the vigilant Gustavus intercepted his march, at the head of the Dalecarlians assisted by the Germans, and rushing like a Torrent from a steep Hill, bore down the sinking Danes before him, so that the Archbishop who had boasted to bring Gustavus to Stockholm, Dead, or a Prisoner, was compell'd to return without him leaving behind five Parts of his Army dead, and wounded.
Gustavus immediately follow'd him, and set down before Stockholm, which so surpriz'd the Vice-roy and Archbishop, that they (not depending much upon the Fidelity of the Citizens) retir'd to Denmark, where informing Christiern of the State of Sweden, that fell Tyrant, in revenge, sacrific'd the Lives of the Mother and Sister of Gustavus. This News stab'd the Heart of the brave Gustavus, and allay'd the Joy he felt for the Conquest of the best part of Sweden.
In November 1520, a Convention of the States met to think of some Form of Government, wherein Gustavus was unanimously chose Administrator.
This Hero having a Sanction for his Proceedings, was resolv'd to extend his Conquests, and not leave a single Dane in his Kingdom, and in order to pay his Troops, he (his Finances being in a low Condition) mortgag'd his whole private Patrimony.
Stockholm still continu'd in the Hands of the Danes, and as Norbi the Danish Admiral commanded the Sea, he fear'd it wou'd prove a difficult Undertaking, for want of Ships to oppose him.
Gustavus therefore sent once more his Secretary to Lubeck to solicite that Republick for a naval Force, who return'd with seventeen Ships of War, and four thousand Land Soldiers.
This Fleet arriv'd on Whitsun-Eve in Sweden, and landed their Marines, the which Gustavus order'd to reinforce his Army before Stockholm. Fleming that commanded the Squadron, cruiz'd before the Harbour to prevent any Succour from entring the Town. Where he receiv'd Information that the Danish Fleet was within Ken; he order'd his to shrowd themselves behind the Cape that forms the Harbour. Two of the smallest Frigates were sent by the Danes to explore the Coasts (tho' they had heard nothing of the Lubeck Squadron) as soon as the first Frigate had doubled the Cape, she was taken; Fleming mann'd her with Swedes, and sail'd back to meet the other where the Danish Admiral was, who seeing the first return, came in a Boat to meet her to know the reason of her coming back, but soon shar'd the same Fate. When this was done, Fleming attack'd the whole Squadron, and conquer'd all but one desperate Captain, who fought like a Fury, and chose rather to blow up his Ship than fall into the hands of the Swedes.
Norbi was so exasperated at this Misfortune, that he invaded Sweden with all the Danish naval Force. He found their Fleet in the Harbour of Stockholm, and came to a Battle that lasted several Hours, but seeing the appearance of an approaching Storm, steered out of the Harbour, to a little Island to prevent the Effects of it, this Bay was safe, but near the Shore. In the first part of the Night there came so hard a Frost, that his Ships were frozen. The ever vigilant Gustavus, upon that Knowledge, advanc'd secretly in the Night, and attack'd the Enemy with his Land Forces, set fire to, and destroy'd several Vessels of the Enemy, and might have ruin'd 'em all, but for the Inactiveness of the Lubeckers. The next Day the Sun having melted the Ice, Norbi retir'd with the remainder of his Squadron to the Port of Calmar.
In the mean time the Tyrant Christiern was depos'd by his grieving Subjects in favour of the Duke of Holstein, which when Norbi understood, he gave up all Thoughts of relieving Stockholm, and retired with his Fleet to Gothland.
Gustavus conven'd the Estates of the Kingdom, where they with universal Acclamations chose him King (tho' he for the present refus'd to be crown'd for many politick Reasons) calling him The Deliverer of his Country, congratulating their own Happiness in so puissant a Monarch.
After this he march'd with all his Forces, attended by the Deputies of the Kingdom, to besiege Stockholm, now reduced to the utmost Necessity, but his Successes had so terrified them, that they surrendred at Discretion.
King Gustavus entred in Triumph, pompously dress'd for the Occasion. His Mien, his Youth, his Lenity, and noble Deportment, gain'd him the Love and Admiration of all that beheld him.
Archbishop Trolio heard the Advancement of Gustavus with a rancorous Heart, and tamper'd so artfully with the new King of Denmark, that he persuaded him to send an Ambassador to claim his Right to the Swedish Crown, but the Indignation of the Swedes return'd him to his Master, with a Proclamation that declar'd Trolio a Traitor and a Rebel, and out of the unbounded Love to their illustrious Monarch invested him with an absolute Power of Regal Sway.
Gustavus in Return sent an Envoy to Frederick, to demand Steno's Widow, and several Ladies that had been confin'd in Denmark ever since the Massacre at Stockholm: And the Danish King understanding the Strength, Unanimity, and the Power of Sweden, thought fit to wave his Pretensions to that Crown, and enter into an offensive and defensive Treaty against Christiern who was soliciting Powers in Germany to regain both Kingdoms: He therefore sent Gustavus, Steno's Widow and the Ladies, with an honourable Convoy to Sweden.
When they arrived, the King and all his Court, honourably received them, and conducted them to the City.
Norbi the Danish Admiral frequently infested the Swedish Coast, giving the Names of Usurpers and Traitors to Gustavus and Frederick King of Denmark. He took many Prizes, but chiefly the Traders of Lubeck, their frequent Losses so terrify'd that Trading Republick, that they sent an Envoy to Gustavus for Assistance to root out that Pyrate. The Prince was hardly prevail'd upon to undertake this Expedition, however by the Perswasions of his Subjects, he overrun that Island and set down before the Capital with ten thousand Men. But Norbi hoisted the Danish Standard, went over to Frederick, and dealt so politickly with him and the Lubeckers, that Frederick sent a Fleet which enter'd the Port of Wisby the Capital of Gothland, without any Opposition from the Fleet of Sweden. The two Kings met and held a Conference relating to each others Right to Gothland, but it was not determin'd; yet they parted in seeming good Friends. When Gustavus return'd to Sweden, his Subjects pressed him to hasten his Coronation, but his Reasons concerning the Change of Religion were not ripe enough for that Ceremony. The Doctrine of Luther took footing in Sweden, abetted secretly by the King, but it was a nice and dangerous Affair, and tho' his Hand was open ready for the Grasp of the overgrown Revenues of the Bishops to support the Crown, yet he durst not at that Juncture seize, but he effected it at last, seiz'd the Church Plate and Utensils, their Bells and Crosses. This alarm'd the Clergy, who are too often tenacious of their Privileges, who took a Resolution to stir up the Peasants at their yearly Meeting at Upsal, to demand their Restoration, and his abolishing the new Edict of the Tythes. But Gustavus having Spies every where, came upon them at the Head of a Body of Horse, to their no little Surprize at his sudden Appearance: There was such an Air of Grandeur and Authority, with the Force of Eloquence in all his Actions, that aw'd the boldest of these Malecontents, and soon brought them on their Knees to sue for Pardon. This Business was no sooner ended, but another rose of a worse Consequence. A Groom, whose Name was Hans, a bold and daring Fellow, of a quick Wit and Parts, set himself up for the Son of Steno their late Administrator (tho' that young Prince had been dead a Year before.) He took that Prince's Name (Hils Steno) upon Him: He had by his Arts, and Support of some discontented great Men, rais'd a powerful Faction in the Provinces distant from the Court.
Gustavus being advised of this Design, thro' Shame of so unworthy a Competitor, seem'd to despise it; however he caused Letters to be wrote by Steno's Widow to the Dalecarlians, wherein she declared her Son had been dead above a Year. This Letter had the desired Effect, for his tumultuous Adherents soon left him, and he made his speedy Flight to Norway, where he was entertained by the Archbishop of  Drontheim (Drontheim is the capital City of the Kingdom of Norway: it is seated on the Western Shores of that Dominion. In Latin called Nidrosia, from the River Nider, on which it is built. It is a very rich City, with as safe a Harbour as any in the North, commanded by a very strong Castle but no other Fortification. The Government of this City reaches from North to South a hundred and forty Leagues, and thirty five, from East to West.) as Prince of Sweden, where he levy'd Forces, and was so artful as to pass upon them for the Prince he represented.
Gustavus, to oppose him, sent a Body of Horse, which once more forced him to abandon his Party, and fly to  Rostoc (Rostoc, a City in the Lower Saxony, on the Baltick, built on the River Warne. It is a Hans Town, but under the Protection of the Duke of Mecklenburgh.) a City in  Mecklenburgh (Mecklenburgh, or Meckleburgh, a large City and Province in Germany, of the Lower Saxony. In the Times of the Vandals this City was accounted the largest in Europe.), where the Chiefs of that Place had his Head struck off.
The King very well knew the Clergy were deep in this Rebellion, therefore he set about gaining them to his Interest, which afterwards he effected by banishing the German Clergy and all Foreign Priests out of his Dominions, supplying their Places with his own Friends.
Gustavus, seeing that most of his Subjects had changed their Religion, declar'd himself a Lutheran, and immediately upon that Declaration he proceeded to his Coronation, which was performed with the greatest Solemnity at Upsal, by the new Archbishop Laurentius Petri: At the same time he conferr'd the Honour of Knighthood on the chief Lords and Senators of Sweden.
Now Gustavus, after the Fatigues of War, made room for the softer Passion of Love. He cast his Eyes on the Beauties of the Daughter of the Duke of  Saxe Lawenburgh (Saxe Lawenburgh, one of the Provinces of Lower Saxony.), who esteemed it an Honour to be ally'd to so illustrious an Hero. This Princess was sent by her Father, with a noble Retinue, to Stockholm, where the King met her, and the Marriage was consummated with the utmost Magnificence. He had hardly tasted his Happiness, ere he receiv'd Intelligence, that the banish'd King Christiern was sailing towards Norway with thirty Vessels, and an Army of ten thousand Soldiers he had gather'd up in the Provinces Germany, &c. But his Fleet was scatter'd by a Storm: However he made a shift to land on the Coast of Norway: His Pretence was Religion, which he knew wou'd bring the discontented Clergy to own his Cause. Frederick King of the Danes was as much interested in Christiern's Descent, as Gustavus, therefore that Monarch sent out a Squadron of Ships of War early in the Spring, that met with Christiern's Fleet in the Bay of  Bahuys (Bahuys, (Bahusium) is an Island in the Baltick Sea, bounded on the East by Gothland. It is a fruitful Island, near a hundred Miles long, and thirty broad.), where (after an obstinate Fight that continu'd a whole Day) the Ships of Christiern were most of 'em destroy'd.
This unfortunate King made another Attempt to enter Sweden by the way of Gothland, but was opposed by a Party of three thousand Swedish Horse, which compel'd him to throw himself in the little Town of Congel in West Gothland, for his better Security, where he was so strictly besieg'd, that Famine cou'd not be ranked among the least of his Enemies, most of his Officers and Soldiers fled to the Swedes, choosing rather to be Prisoners than starve.
The Bishop of  Odense (Odense, a City of Denmark, the Capital of the Island Fionia, between Jutland to the West, and Zeeland to the East, separated from 'em both, by two narrow Channels. The City of Odense is strong, and well built. It is a pleasant and fruitful Island, considering the Climate.), seeing to what Misery this unhappy Monarch was reduc'd, felt pity for his Condition, therefore persuaded him to submit his Person to Frederick, assuring him at the same time, he wou'd answer for the Success. Christiern having no other Hope took the Bishop's Advice, and accompany'd with the cunning Trolio, and a few of his Attendance, he arriv'd at Copenhagen, where the King of Denmark had him seiz'd, and imprison'd in the Castle of  Soneburgh (Soneburgh, the Capital of the Island of Oesel, in the Mouth of the Bay of Livonia. The Island is about eighty Miles in Circuit.). In that Place he was confin'd till he had sign'd a formal Resignation of the Crowns of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway. When that was done, his Bounds were enlarged, having the Liberty granted him of Fishing, Hunting, &c. and was treated like a Prince (tho' narrowly watch'd) till his Death.
Archbishop Trolio retir'd to Lubeck, where he form'd a Leage with that Regency, and Prince Christopher of Oldenburgh, to raise Troops in order to release King Christiern from his Confinement, and struggle once more for the Crown of Denmark. But he that so often had stain'd his white Robes with Blood, was wounded in the Battle of Funon, taken Prisoner, and died of his Wounds at  Sleswick (Sleswick, a City of Denmark, in the Province of Holstein, seated on the River Sleie (from whence it takes its Name) that disembogues its Streams into the Baltick, near that City.) in Holstein.
The Great Gustavus, being thus happily rid of his Enemies, and his Dominions in a profound Peace, apply'd himself wholly to the Improvement of Trade.
He built Citadels and Royal Palaces in many Parts of the Kingdom, with a Magnificence unknown before to the Swedes. He never resided long in one Place, but progress'd from Province to Province, attended by most of his Court, which accustomed his Subjects to his Sight and Authority. This great King, Hero and Statesman in one, gave Audience to all Sorts of Persons; he decided all Causes and Controversies, with a Judgment peculiar to himself, and as War was carried on without the Assistance of Generals, so he rul'd absolute in a profound Peace many Years. He reign'd alone, without either Favourites or Mistresses, or ever raising the Undeserving; He liv'd belov'd by his Subjects and fear'd by his Enemies.
Our renowned Hero had four Sons, Eric the eldest, whom he had Hopes of matching to Elizabeth Queen of England whose Alliance he much wish'd for. He therefore, in order to bring this Affair about, sent an Ambassador to that Virgin Queen, to propose a Confederacy between the two Nations. The Queen of England was courted by most of the Princes of Europe, but she had the Art to manage her Lovers as she pleased, amusing them with Hope, in their several Turns, according to the State of her Affairs.
This Ambassador was Tutor to Prince Eric; when he arriv'd at the Court of Queen Elizabeth, he was receiv'd with all the Marks of Kindness and Respect. The Proposals he made in the Name of his Master, in Relation to Commerce and Confederacy, were favourably heard, and when he mention'd a stricter Alliance between that Queen and Prince Eric, he had no reason to complain on that Subject. He therefore return'd to Sweden, where he inform'd Gustavus, that there was nothing wanting but the Presence of Prince Eric, to compleat the Alliance between the two Crowns.
Prince Eric was endowed with many Qualities that were sufficient to recommend him to those whose Judgment lies in the Sense of seeing only, for Nature had been liberal in bestowing Favours on him. The Symmetry of his Body was exact; In short, to say no more, he was the very Copy of his Father, with the same Air of Grandeur, Majestick Presence and Authority that drew Respect from all that saw him: But the Lustre of these outward Qualifications were darkened by some inward Passions of the Mind that ill became the Heart of a Prince
Gustavus knowing all his Failings, wou'd not be persuaded to let his Son visit the young Queen of England, nay, he had some Thoughts of settling the Crown of Sweden on his Second Son, a Prince endow'd with all the Virtues of his great Father. But that wise Monarch considering such a Preference might kindle a Civil War both in his Family and Kingdom, resolv'd to regulate the Succession, according to the Order of Birthright, and in the mean time to satisfie Prince Eric (whom his Tutor had inspir'd with a violent Passion for the Queen of England), he consented that Prince John, his second Son, shou'd go to the Court of Queen Elizabeth, under the Pretence of Travel, and try to fix her in Favour of his elder Brother.
The Queen receiv'd him with the most obliging Expressions of Kindness, yet so dexterously avoided his Proposals of Marriage with Prince Eric his Brother, that Prince John was out of all Hope.
Prince Eric thought his Presence wou'd do the Business effectually, sollicited the Senate to gain Leave from his Father to go in Person to negotiate the Affair of Marriage: Gustavus knowing the violence of his Temper, was persuaded at last to let him go, with a Retinue suitable to his Quality and Occasion; for that wise Prince foresaw if he did not give his Son Leave, that he wou'd either go without his Consent, or raise some Commotion in the State.
However before he wou'd let him depart for England, he sign'd his Last Will, and divided his Kingdoms among the Princes his Sons; to the eldest Prince Eric he left his Crown; to Prince John his second Son, the Dukedom of Finland; to Prince Magnus his third, East Gothland; to Prince Charles the youngest, Sudermania; under the Titles of Principalities, and all to swear Fealty, and pay Homage to the Crown of Sweden.
Prince Eric was highly offended at this Distribution of his Father's, and had Thoughts of taking up Arms to have this Will disannull'd, but was restrain'd from it, when he consider'd Gustavus was King of his Children as well as his Subjects. He therefore stifled his Resentments for the present, but made a Resolution to do it himself, whene'er the Supreme Power shou'd fall into his Hands: But now his Imaginations were all employ'd upon his Love, and his Time taken in preparing for his Voyage; he came to the Port of  Elsingbourgh (Elsingbourgh, a good Port in Denmark over against Zeeland.), where he was stop'd with the News of his illustrious Father's Death, from whence he return'd to take Possession of the Crown of Sweden.
This Heroick Prince, in the 70th Year of his Age was seized with an inward Fever, that quickly gave him notice of approaching Death. He dismiss'd his Court, and even his Physicians that seem'd to flatter him with Life, and gave up his Breath in the arms of his most faithful Servants, September the 29th, 1560. His Body was interr'd at Upsal, and embalm'd with the Tears of all his Subjects; and his Memory is still dear to them.
This Illustrious Hero enter'd the Realms of Death adorn'd with such shining Honours that will eclipse those ancient Heroes Alexander and Caesar.
I don't know any Author (in my Opinion) has made a better use of the Poetica Licentia, than the Author of the Play of Gustavus Vasa; and I think it must give all Lovers of the Drama an infinite Satisfaction to find his first Essay arrive at Perfection. And I do not in the least doubt, but his Success will be answerable to the Greatness of his Merit. For the Judicious Part of an Audience take as much pleasure in supporting a deserving Piece, as they do in exploding one that has no Merit at all.
FINIS.
