A BRIEF RELATION OF THE Life and Death Of the late Famous Mathematician and Astrologer, Mr. Vincent Wing. TOGETHER With his Nativity, as it was done, many years before his Death, by his own hand; And now for general satisfaction, made publick. ------ By J. G. Philomathematikos. ------ Quum Moritur vir, an revicturus est? Job. 14. ----- Et Mortuus adhuc per hanc loquitur. Heb. 11. ------ London, Printed by T. Milbourn for John Stephens in Westminster-Hall, 1670. 
 ERRATA Corrigenda.  Some other slight faults are escaped, which the Author presumes the Candid Reader will of himself Correct.
   To the Honourable Edward Deering, of London Esq; His Majesties Merchant, and Receiver General of his Majesties Revenues in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey &c. Honoured Sir, NOt only your acquaintance with the Sciences Mathematical, and the many profitable Labors of the Industrious Person, whose Life I here publish, but your known affection to all the friends of URANIA, hath invited me to this address: As also to return my humble thanks, for that you were pleased lately in a Company of Giant-like, yet ignorant opposers, as well Nobly to favour the Truths of Astrology, as courteously to own me and my meaner Arguments in its behalf. In which contest, by your prevailing and sinnewey Reasons, you so far wrought upon their Passion and Prejudice (little than a Miracle;) that at length those angry Opponents (although some of them were men otherwise learned, and Elderly too) began ingeniously to acknowledge, that they had never heard so much discourse of Astrology in all their Lives; and therewithal frankly engaged to enquire into the grounds of that Science, before they believed any more reports against it. A good president for all that are Enemies to any truth upon the bare hear-say of others; or, because the ignorant Multitude (as taught by the supercilious (I mean only the Angry presbytes who of all men most emulates Astrology; and yet huggs an opinion an 100 times more ridiculous than any one principle thereof; nay, directly untrue; Viz. that of Praedestination in the most terrifying sence.) Man in Black) have declaimed, or rather snarled against it. Vox Populi is not alwaies Vox Dei; And Truth is too Coy to be courted by the Rabble-rout; She hath select Favourites to whom she dispenceth her Graces. 
In your acceptance of this Dedication, you will help to preserve to posterity a true Son of Science; One, whose Industry was such that Ages will scarcely Equal. And yet (Sir) not so much protect him, as that mean Piece, I have in, the following History drawn of him, scarce to the Life I confess. My numbers are too immusical to sound forth his worth; And my Colours (now like his Ghost) too pale and lifeless, to express his great Deservings. Mr. Wing was his own best Herald; And his Fame will live for ever, in his own works. What I have done, is only to pay a grateful respect to his Ashes, as he was my friend, that future times may find, he had some who were contemporary with him, that knew how to value him and his merits. If therefore (Sir) you will vouchsafe me but a corner of the Mantle of your Nobler Reputation and Favour, for my defence, you will thereby, at once, keep Mr. Wing warm in his Coffin, and cover the many imperfections of him, who (thus endeavours to embalm his memory, against the Flesh-flies of Envy and Detraction; and) esteems it one of his greatest Felicities, that he hath an opportunity to entitle himself,
 Honoured Sir Your real Servant and Honourer, J. Gadbury. From my study in BrickCourt by the DeansYard Westminster. ------ ------  SOME REMARKS ON THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. VINCENT WING, Compared with his Nativity. MR. Vincent Wing was born at North Luffenham in the County of Rutland, in the Year of our Lord 1619. on the Ninth Day of April, at Five Hours Forty-Eight Minutes P.M. or Afternoon. He was a branch of an honest and virtuous stock: as proceeding from Parents rather good, than great; who, with their Ancestors have been long seated in the said Town of Luffenham, enjoying a greater blessing in their continued and setled condition, than many others in the Multitude of Riches: (Mr. Wing's Ancestors 1st came out of Wales, and settled at great Panton neer Grantham in Lincolnshire, and neer 100. Yeares since Planted themselves in North Luffenham, and as I have it ascertain'd me from an honorable hand, there have bin of them in that place three Generations successively, with himself. 
It frequently happens that far greater Families oftner change their Seats; & somtimes, (in much shorter space) do also lose their Names.)
 A fixed Habitation, being even the mightiest Mercy that Fortune can bestow upon Mortality; and so characterized by GOD Himself to Moses in the Mount. Whereas a wandring or erratique condition, or course of life, either in Persons or Families, is, not only a reproach, but a Curse to them that undergo it, and their future Generations. And this Cain in the beginning of time, and the Jewes since the Death of our Saviour have, by a long, and miserable experience, found certain and true. But Mr. Wing's Family, hath been happy above many other Families, in the inheriting so peculiar a blessing; and yet not more fortunate therein, than in the bringing forth this their ingenious and industrious Son: Who, from his own merit and endeavours, (with God's blessings thereupon) hath, not only preserved, but much augmented the Reputation of his deserving Predecessors; and so firmly planted his Name and Memory there, leaving to his Posterity, an Estate and Fortune considerable to support and maintain it, should their after endeavours be wanting thereunto; of which, I am (credibly) informed, there is at present no just cause to doubt.
 Where a large Purse, or ample Fortune to a Father is wanting, the Son, though never so prompt and meritorious, must be content to miss of a liberal breeding; and thus it fared with Mr. Wing: whose Lot it was to be of capable years, and fit for Learning, even in the worst of times; Viz. at the beginning of our late unhappy Confusions: When Rebellion was opposed to Loyalty; Plundering and Free-Quarter to the providing for, and advancement of Posterity; The Pistol and Pole-Axe to Terence and Tully, &c. (Mr. Wing wanted an Academical Education; and the reasons thereof.) And every well-meaning Person (though of a Fortune competent) had enough to do to shift and provide for Himself. In which unhappy, (and perhaps unheard of) Calamity, Mr. Wing's best Friends and Parents sharing, were the more disabled for pursuing his promotion and encouragement in Learning. But although it was his luckless Fortune and unhappiness, to want an Academical Education; yet such was his Natural Inclination and Propensity to an acquaintance with Letters, that by his own Industry, and study, he had in time, conquered a competent Portion of Learning, Viz. A perfect acquaintance of the Latine Tongue, and a moderate understanding in the Greek, &c. (Dominus Ascendentis applicatus Domino M.C. existenti in sua exaltatione, decernit Natum ex se ipso honores cumulaturum. Argol. 134 P.) By which happy advantages, the greatest and most critical Authors and Masters of Astrologie, and the Mathematiques, in their own Language, were no strangers unto Him. From whence we may collect this true and modest Observation. --  "That Mr. Wing was born a Scholar, although not bred, or made one; and therefore preferrible before many Thousands that had the gainful advantage of an University Learning, and yet were not therewith capable of matching Him in Mathematical and Astrological Performances. So excellent is an Innate worth and glory, that all the external Paints and Florishes cannot so much as equalize, much less transcend or surpass it.
 Yet let the ingenious Reader know, that I have no dis-respect for the Muses, or for such, whose happy Fate it is, to suck at the sacred Brests of Minerva; as having the Schools of Learning in Adoration, and ever bearing a high honour and value for all those that derive Science from them: And could heartily wish that our English Universities were so happy, as to Nurse and Foster (And I could wish also, that such whose inclinations bend to learning, might be but so happy as not to miss an Academical Education.) only such, whose Genitures render them capable of Learning what they always prudently teach; those being the most probable of making returns of Gratitude unto them, and of sounding forth to the World their deserved Honour and Fame. How many are there that be constantly Educated in Schools of Good Literature, that for want of a Genious to cope with, and conquer Science, become rather the Scorn than Honour of Learning? Of every Wood a Mercury(Ex quolibet Ligno non fit Mercurius.) cannot be made. If the Flint have no Fire in it naturally, in vain is the Steel applyed unto it, in hopes of procuring any. Schools of Learning being like unto skilful Lapidaries, who polish the Diamonds of our minds, and understandings; and set a radiant lustre upon them, although we bring them thither rugged and mishapen: (and thither we must bring them, or go without our errand.) And indeed, Men must have peculiar Stars for the attaining such a peculiar Favour and blessing from the Hand of God and Nature: And being so furnish'd, will in time appear, and shew themselves, and Dart forth their Native Splendor, (like our Mr. Wing) although they should want the Embellishes and Polishes of Education. (yet I say not all out so happily!) And if this our deceased Friend were so eminently successful and deserving without them, and shined in his Generation above and beyond so many, that had the enjoyment of such adorning acquisitions; What would He have done, and how spreading would His Fame have been, if His so rare Natural Parts had met in Conjunction with them?
 But because Mr. Wing was an Astrologer and Mathematician, and that perhaps these Papers, may be mostly inspected by such as are inclined to those curious Sciences; I shall desire, and expect the Pardon of the ingenious, if I swerve a little from common Method in the Writing the Life of this my worthy Friend; and here, before I proceed any further, insert his Nativity, as it was curiously done by his own hand, and by Himself friendly communicated to me several Years  before He dyed (See my Col. Genit. p. 2. where the Scheme thereof is Printed.): He being of so generous a Mind and Courage, and yet so humble withall, that, as he did not fear to fore-see, or fore-know any evil of Himself, so He was not elevated or puffed up with the thoughts of any prescient advantages that were likely to issue to him: but used his Nativity, and what he understood thereby, (as the great Apostle used the Word,) as if he used it not. Submitting Himself (even in the best or worst of things, by it either promised or threatned) ever to the guidance and governance of that Universal Power, that ruleth all things by the wisdome of his Providence, even God blessed for ever! Astrological diagram
  Three astrological tablesHere are no less than four Planets Competitors for the honour of Almuten in this Geniture: viz. The Moon, Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus: and truly, if I understood his Mind and Actions aright, he equally shared in their peculiar qualities and significations. For he wanted not the publick Fame and multiplicity of business that the Moon gives; nor the Ingenuity that Mercury bestows; nor the Justice and Goodness that Jupiter affordeth; nor yet the harmless and pleasant conversation, (to sweeten the rest, for without that all business is a burthen, and all knowledge a slavery!) that Venus patronizeth: but of this more anon.
 The Sun alone is Hylech, or Propagator vitae, the Geniture being Diurnal, and he in an Aphetical place. (Omar de Nativit. Lib. 2. Cap: 3. &c. Firmic. Lib. 2. Fol. 57. ad Mavort.) And (being just entring Taurus) we may admit Venus the Alchocoden, or giver of Years: Or should we (in respect of the Moon's being so powerful in the Figure) admit her a sharer in the designing of Life, (which is not altogether unreasonable, but agreeable to the Opinions of Omar and Firmicus,) then will Jupiter be Alchocoden; which is in effect the same; for both their mean Years are Forty-five, and more they cannot give of themselves in this Nativity; because one of them is oppressed by Saturn's Quadrate, and the other by Mars his Opposition: and although Mr. Wing lived beyond these, Four Years at the least, that is to be attributed to the strength of his Nativity in general, and not to his Alchocoden; which could not preserve him above the aforesaid number of Years for the Reasons before remembred.
 Saturn is the Anareta, or the Destroyer of Life in this Geniture; as being, First, Locally placed in the Eighth House; Secondly, As afflicting the Lady of the Horoscope; Thirdly, As he is Lord of the Fourth House, which Astrologically signifieth the Grave; Fourthly, As he is a Planet inimical to Nature. And accordingly when the Sun or Hylech was directed to his Conjunction or Body, Mr. Wing dyed.
 And so I come to consider of the Nativity it self, and to compare it with the Actions, Dispositions and Inclinations of the deceased Person to whom it appertained.
 Herein you see that Signum Justitiae, or the Coelestial Ballance is ascending the Horoscope, and the Royal fixed Star, mikros kontaratos, or the Virgins Spike ariseth therewith: (Stellae fixae irrationabile is atque admirabile is faelicitates afferunt, &c. Prol. Cent. Aphor. 29.) plainly demonstrating Mr. Wing (according to the Rules of Astrology) to be born for an honourable end and purpose; and to do great and worthy things in his Generation; which he hath not failed to perform: thereby eminently justifying the influences of those Stars, that (Sub Deo) have honoured him at his intrat into this World. (Spica Virginis in Ascendente, dignitates altas impartitur, &c. Ptol. Parv. p. 131.) The benigne Planet Venus is Governess of the Horoscope, and posited in her exaltation, in Trine of the Moon, and in a noble receptionof Luna and Jupiter: all, of most admirable import and signification, as every understanding Astrologer knows. And agreeable hereunto, Mr. Wing, as he was honoured equally with many above his degree, so he merited such respect; being a Man (Dominus decimae in nona, Natus erit honestae vitae. Argol. p. 42.)/NOTE> of a very just and pious frame and temper; generally even humored: at sometimes he would admit of facetiousness without scandal, affability without injury; (enus honestè posita, ut in suis, dignitatibus, cum Luna, &c. Honestos mores, & laudabiles decernit. Argol. 116. p.) and did a little delight in a free and harmless conversation; being neither too austere on the one hand, or too vain and fruitless on the other. But (like his Horoscope) was equally poiz'd between both, and yielded to neither extream. He was scarcely known to envy any man, (and do you not see that Mars is the weakest Planet in the Scheame?) as it he had wanted Choler to awaken Revenge, or to create a passion:) but, on the contrary, was kind respective and obliging to all men: even to his enemies, (as the Holy Rule enjoyns) if they were not, beyond the line of reason, malicious and provoking. He was nothing ambitious or insulting, but rather meek and humble, and always apt to depreciate himself. (All Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire, and the Countreys round about, give this general good & commendable Character of him; as any that pleases, may more particularly inform themselves from any of the Gentry of those Countreys, as my self have done before the writing hereof, because I would publish nothing but truth concerning him.) He was never distrustful or suspicious of others, because free from the taint of those qualities himself, and always virtuous, and true hearted. These are the natural significations of such happy and Heaven-favouring Positions, together with their genuine verifications. And the better to enforce and make good all this that we have said, (and more) it is observable that the Noble Trine of the Moon and Venus, &c. before spoken of, is made from those two Planets greatest dignities, Viz. that of Astrologers called House and Exaltation; which gave Mr. Wing a more curious frame of Soul, and a better opportunity and means to shew the excellency, integrity, activity, and evenness thereof, than if so glorious an Aspect had proceeded from weaker parts of the Heavens: I mean, from such parts or places wherein those Planets had less delighted, or had been more meanly and poorly dignified. Thus we see by experience, that the Dignities of the Planets are no vain and idle things; and that we ought to esteem more of them, than of Chimera's, or Castles in the Aire. I could produce a great many parallel instances, but this is so certain and undoubted a truth, that it needs not.
 From this admirable Trine, and it's happening, (not only in the Dignities of the Planets Trining, but) in the Dignities of the benevolent Planet Jupiter; (Luna in Nono, Naro religioni addicit. Argol. p. 140.) (the Patron of things Divine, &c.) proceeded that great and unfeigned Love, Duty , and Reverence, which Mr. Wing constantly paid to Religion, and to the service of God: being always known for a true and zealous frequenter of the Church, and an adorer of the Clergie; esteeming them the most worthy of Honour and Reverence, that God himself had been pleased to commit the charge of his most honourable and valuable Jewels in the World unto; even the Souls of Men. (Quum jupiter & venus &c. sunt signif. dispositionis Animae, Natus erit simplex, amans nitiditatem, & magisteriam, atque rerum investigationes, -- eritque bonae qualitatis animae pius, sani cordis. Deum amabit, & illi serviet, cupiet etiam amore Dei, laboriosus esse, erit sensatus, & amans, humilis, &c. Prol. Quadrip. lib. 3. cap. 13.) He was indeed so much, and so great a votary to Religion and Piety, that many of the Almanacks he annually wrote, were in a manner Sermons, or Expositions or Applications of some useful Texts of Scripture; encouraging People by the Word of GOD, as well as by the Works of God, to follow that which was Religious, Laudable, Good and Profitable. By which ingenious and pious practice of his, we are made happy in the acquaintance of this great truth, (against the perverse, wilful, obstinate, unreasonable and crooked Opinions of the Enemies to all Stary Learning.) That a Man may be a good Christian, and yet an Astrologer: and, that Divinity and Astrologie, to a sober and unprejudiced understanding, are not incompatible: there being no such antipathy between the Word, and works of God, (or those that study the one, and the other, as Naturalists tell us, there is between the Sun and Rue, or the Vine and Colewort,) but that they may well stand and grow together. Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei. Psal. 19. vers. 1. (Rue, or Herbgrace, delights not to grow in the Face of the Sun, although he be the Life of all living things: and this any Gardner will tell you.)
 He was a Person of a very ready, ripe and pregnant wit; and had good judgment and memory thereunto annexed: [The want of the later of which was a defect, that the learned Doctor Hammond exceedingly bewailed in himself, saying, that it was easier for him to Pen twenty Sermons, than to get one by heart.] What Mr. Wing read was his own; and thence he began to be a Mathematician (saturn in domo Mercurii, dat Scientias. Ptol. parv. p. 34. Decima septima pars libra. Si in horoscopo fuerit inventa -- & moon bene posita, ad benevolas plena lumine feratur Literatos faciet, &c. Firmicus. Lib. 8. Cap. 21.) in his younger years, being capable of understanding all the parts of Arithmetique, of the several ways used in Surveying Land, Measuring all sorts of heights and distances, &c. As also of making all kinds of Dyals, with many other neat and commendable acquirements, by that time he was but Eighteen Years of Age; as I have often heard Himself, as well as others report. So that in a sence, it may be said of him, as it was of the Holy St. Remigius, and the great Doctor S. Thomas Aquinas, -- That from the time of his first capacity of Learning, he out stripped those that were much his Superiours in Age, and (I may justly add) in Education also.
 And truly, he had need be naturally ingenious, that attempts such lofty, crabbed, coy, and difficult studies at any time, much more in his Juvenile Years: When the Feather of Youth is high and spreading, and principally waves us to vanities; seldome suffering our inclinations to reach after serious or weighty things; they being as contrary thereunto, as Blood to Melancholy, Heat to Cold, Winter to Summer, &c. But this Mr. Wing was born (Astrologus nascitur, non fit. ) to prove the Influences of the Stars certain and true; and by an apt demonstration in himself to shew us, That the God of Stars is not tyed to the meaner methods and observations of Men, or to his own ordinary way of working; but pursues the Rules of his own good will and pleasure, varying from his common course, how, and when, and as oft as he pleaseth. Thus he can satisfie the stomach (beyond Man's reason) without food; the Thirst without Wine; and feed our intellectuals also (if he vouchsafe it) without instruction of Books or Letters. (matth. cap. 15. vers. 36,37. 1 Cor cap. 1. vers. 25,26.) 'Tis his Prerogative peculiar, to make strong things of weak, and excellent things, of things contemptible and despised; an Age in Youth; and contrariwise, a Childishness in elder years; and by this his foolishness, sometimes to amaze, othertimes to destroy, the wisdom of Men. Thus, to declare his Omnipotence, he is pleased to raise Ventidius, (though of a very low and mean extraction) to the greatest honour and dignity in Rome: (Dominus medii Caeli in suis dignitatibus applicatus domino Ascenden is Orientalis honoris in regno pollicetur, & Principum familia natem. Arg. p. 134.) And to make Cicero (whose Parentage, or Original, if story may be credited, was scarce known) Pater Patriae, the Father of his Country. And thus by God's especial favour and benignity, is Mr. Wing raised, from an indifferent degree and quality, to be a Reputation to his Country, and a promoter of the severer Sciences. (Sol in Cuspide septimae tribuit honores, & gloriam post mortem. Ptol. par. p. 133.) And from them, to an equal honour (for indeed He hath taken more than equal pains) with the admirable and ingenious Kepler; with the ever celebrated Alphonsus, with the renowned Ticho Brahe; with the immortal and ever glorious Julius Caesar! with all which illustrious and famous Persons, his Name and Memory will for ever shine in the treasury and bibliotheck of Fame; (Canis Syrius, sicut Procyon in medio Caeli , (as here) dat honores magnos, &c. Ptol. par. 131.) for his indefatigable and admired Industry, Acquisitions and Performances in all Mathematical, and Astrological Learning. (Gradus medii Caeli exaltatio Jovis (I am sure it is neer it) Celebre nomen diffundit.  Argol. p. 132.)
 To fit him with a Soul for these illustrious enquiries (for such they are) he had, in his Nativity, a noble reception of Mars and Mercury, (and Mercury swift in motion) and this by the dignity House" RESP="errata">of house, Viz. the greatest that can be: (mercury. Motu velex facit expeditos in inventionibus & rationibus.) and such that Astrologers generally account equivalent to a Sextile or Trine Aspect of them: and the Moon (which is the Conveyer of all the other Planets influxes to this our Terrene Star) is hastning to an Aspect of them both. (Bene dispositi Mercurius, & Mars faciunt ingenio acutissimo. pag. 137.) Which (in an Astrological sence) forceth the imagination, fancy and ingenuity of a Person (pardon the expression, for it is very true,) that is so born, beyond the common rate of exertion, and ripens the mind (with all its faculties) in so celerous and active a manner, that it affordeth a Harvest of Wit and Judgment in such Men, before there will be an appearence of a Spring in others, that shall unfortunately want these forwarding Configurations. And thus it cometh to pass, that some Persons are so prodigiously, and to a Miracle illuminate, and afford great Crops of Art and Learning, before others of more tenebrous and Cloudy souls, can put forth either Leaf or Blossome.
 Thus it was apparent in the Nativity of that Reverend Prelate, the late Lord Primate of Ireland, Doctor Usher, (See the History of his Life.) (whom Paulus Testardus justly stiles, Seculi, & Ecclesiae decus eximum, the greatest honour of the Church and Age) who, having such a Configuration in his Geniture, was so active and forward in his studies, that (the History of his Life saith) he was created Master of Arts at Twenty Years of Age. (Vide my Collectio Geniturarum, p. 2. Where all their Nativities are to be found.) Thus also, the late Reverend Bishop of Durham, Doctor Morton (from the same Reason in his Nativity) was learned betimes in comparison of many others, as is recorded in the History of his Life. So also the late Learned Doctor Hall, Bishop of Norwich (being born when Mars and Mercury were in Trine Aspect,) was known to be Master of as large and spreading intellectual abilities, as any learned in the whole World: Witness the several incomparable Pieces he wrote, and left behind him in Print; especially that learned and pious Treatise, entituled his Contemplations. Thus likewise, the most learned and acute Phylosophers, Henry Cornelius Agrippa, and John Baptist (See his Nativity, as done by himself in his Astrologia Gallica.) Morine, &c. whose noble Genitures shewed the same worthy configurations: and who more nimble, and fortunately forward in all kind of learning than they? Infinite numbers more could I ininstance in, who (as these already mentioned, with our Mr. Wing, enjoying such excellent and beneficial rayes of the Stars,) have been as Comets in the Ages they lived and flourished in, attracting the Eyes and Wonder of all Men towards them, for their great and fortunate parts and performances: but these few are sufficient.
 ()By this we are instructed how God Almighty in his wisdome hath suited and proportioned all inferiour actions, Persons and things, to the motions and configurations of the Heavenly Bodies: and how much it makes for the honour of his Majesty, that all temporary productions are ordered and disposed of, by this Coelestial Clock-work; as it hath pleased him to appoint and ordain at the first.
 From this happy reception of Mars and Mercury, together with the Moon's configurations with them, (of which before you have heard) It is observable, -- That Mr. Wing was, not only capable of knowledge and understanding, &c. but was therein very communicative and diffusive. He hated to hide his Talent in a Napkin; or covetously to cloyster up that Science which He so happily (above many thousands of others) had attained unto, and was blessed with all. (Math. 25. & 25.) He was freely willing and ready to impart any thing (let it be never so curious and choice a secret) to any ingenious Person or Son of Urania; and hath often publickly professed, that it was his great discontent and trouble, if at any time in his writings he thought he had not been plain, even to the meanest, or most ordinary, or costive understanding.
 And (to go a little further in this Argument.) these configurations did, not only give him a great love unto, and a delight in knowledge, but a strength of mind, and ability of Body for the same. Thus was he fitted for travelling thorow the most crooked and crucifying parts of Astronomy, &c. As those, of the restoring the (most hard to be found) places of the two most Critical Planets in the Heavens, Mars and (See his excellent Tables (in his Astronomia Instaurata, and Harmonicon Coeleste,) of those Planets motions: As also his Astronomia Britanica, lately published.) Mercury.
 He had (in all respects) an active Geniture: and accordingly hated slothfulness and idleness with a perfect hatred; accounting it a shame and error for any Man to foster or cherish such contemptible issue: or to think that he was created, or brought forth into the World for so despised and inglorious an end. And was therefore so frugal of his time, (like the Thuscan Philosophers, that thought the loss of a Day irreparable;) as, not only, not to mis-employ or mispend any the smallest part or portion thereof, (after he was of capable and understanding Years,) but very prudently and advantagiously, to improve every little Minute; making his Books his recreations, and his severer and wasting studies, his Pleasures.
 If he were of any thing covetous, it was of knowledge: being indeed scarcely ever satisfied therewith; making it his business to frequent the Company (And of this I have had the happiness, of being more than once or twice, a witness.) of the most learned and excellent Men when he came to London at any time, and so to spend his time; whereas others generally turn such journeys into pleasure and recreation: And truly so did Mr. Wing too. For such converse was his soul-satisfying delight; his Mind being principally placed upon such a felicity. Thus did Mr. Wing constantly (both abroad and at home) labour after the discovery of the most mysterious things in Astrologie, Geometry, Algebra, Trigonometry, and all other parts of Mathematical Learning.
 But Mr. Wing did not labour after this toylsome manner, (Churl-like) only to satisfie and please himself, but to profit and advantage others. And to this purpose, after his many years painful labours, and a consuming of himself in study and business; he hath published to the World these several Books following.
 1. His Urania Practica, or Practical Astronomy. 2. Harmonicon Coeleste, or the Harmony of the Visible World. 3. Astronomia Instaurata, in four parts. 4. Ephemerides of the Coelestial motions for 20. Years; with an excellent Introduction to the knowledge of all Mundane Alterations. 5. An ingenious Treatise of Surveying. 6. Examen Astronomiae Carolinae, in his own Defence. 7. Astronomia Britannica, written in Latine, now in the Press, and almost ready to be published. 8. Computatio Catholica; an excellent Treatise, now almost (also) ready to be published: Besides his Annual Labours, which always tended to the utility of the ingenious Astrologers, and Mathematicians. In which Pieces of Astronomy, he hath most facilely solved, the (not very easily solved) Phaenomena of the Heavens; and so plainly proved the motion of the Earth to be an apparent Physical truth, that the very Soul of Copernicus, (the first Inventer of that Opinion, as to this later part of the World,) by a happy Metempsychosis, seems to have enlightned Him to the Demonstration thereof: (Mr. Wing the Reviver, and Defender of the motion of the Earth in these later Times.) and this by such unerring Axioms, and most conspicuous verities, that the (long embraced) contrary Opinions, with all the insoluble systems thereunto belonging, are quite out of Doors, and scarce so much as though of now, (much less with pristine earnestness defended) by any of the most able Astronomers of this Age. So that, had the unfortunate Bishop of Ratisbone, but lived in our more transparent and knowing times, he had never dyed a Martyr for so sure and sound a Truth.  Nay, had Saint Augustine been contemporary with Mr. Wing, his doubt about Antipodes had been fully resolv'd. May we not now (without vanity) aver, that He was the Restorer of Astronomy to this later Age: And not only so, but that he was so happy in his attempts of that kind, that he did nothing without success? Nay, I conceive I may (without offence) urge it, since others, (far more competent Judges of his surpassing abilities than my self) have done it before me. ---- That Mr. Wing hath performed more in, and toward the rectification and perfection of the Coelestial Motions, than all the ingenious Mathematical heads in both Universities have of late Years done; and for the same was honoured, and had in eminent esteem with most of the best learned in this our British Nation.
 Among the many observables in Mr. Wing, this we may not omit in his Praise, and to his Eternal Honour let it be remembred: ------- That He was always a Loyal Person and good Subject, and in the worst of times, when it was esteemed a Crime to be obedient to a lawful Prince and Sovereign, and so much the fashion to be Anarchical and Rebellious; Mr. Wing was so conscientiously just, as always to own his Allegiance: accounting it far better to perform a vow made to God on the behalf of his Prince, than nimbly and unchristianly to swallow Perjury: (a Sin the very Heathen would disdain and protest against!) and although the times he was necessitated to live in, afforded him many great and unhappy examples to that unloyal and ungodly purpose, yet, he still continued his integrity and duty; as well knowing, that Treason against our Sovereign, is equal to Sacrilege against our Saviour. (Videhis many Almanacks wrote in the times of our late Rebellion: when he might have sided against his Sovereign with applause, and gain; as well as some other Almanack-writers; but you find (by them) he was too Loyal for such degenerous & impious actions, or practices.)
 Indeed, Mr. Wing, had, not only a just and Loyal Heart, but a good and Loyal Nativity to shew and to signify it. There was when he was born, in the Heavens a happy Trine between the Lady of the Ascendent and Governess of the Medium Caeli. We know it is as Natural for some Persons to be repugnant and opposite to Government, and to their Prince or Governor, as for some Children or Servants, to be disobedient or rebellious to their Parents or Masters. The reason whereof, is (perhaps) a secret in Astrologie, and scarce known to the best of Artists. It may be worthy thanks to divulge it; and it is this. ----- ( Nota bene.) That, as the gentle and amicable Rayes between the Lords of the Medium Caeli and Horoscope, make loyal and dutiful Persons or Subjects, so their unfriendly beames to each other, create Rebels, Incendiaries, and unloyal Persons. The ingenious Genethliacal Astrologer may spare me the trouble of Instances, he can easily prove the truth hereof himself.
 Albeit, Mr. Wing was a Man of such admirable parts as you have heard, yet he was the least admirer of his own abilities of any Man in the World; but still industrious to improve them. His desire was so strong after study, that he even neglected himself for it's sake, and for the great contentment he took therein. And though his attainments were great, yet was he known more to lament and bemoan his defects, and imperfections, than any way to boast of his skill. He was no way Ostentatious, but on the contrary, very humble; and had nothing of the Pharisaical temper or humour, but like the Laden Ear in Harvest, still bent his head downward; and (with the Peacock) more often look'd upon his Feet, than his Plumes: being ever observed in all company, to give unto others the precedence, or right hand, which perhaps did not inherit the hundreth part of his understanding and knowledge.
 But now, although he was of so self-denying a temper and disposition, and never apt to begin quarrels or contentions with any Man; yet hath it been his fortune (against his inclination) to be engaged in differences: he having been (by some ambitious and troublesome Persons) publickly abused in Print: by two especially, who have, (after their heaping upon him undeserved reproaches,) in an impudent and shameless manner, made use of his works, to dress and furnish out their own; and this without crying Peccavi, or seeking of a reconciliation from him. To signifie (Dominus septimae in duodecima dissensiones decernit cum inimicis.Argol.) which hard measure from his (unexpected, as well as undeserved) Antagonists, he hath, in his Nativity, Mars (an angry Planet) Lord of his Seventh House, posited in Virgo, Retrograde in the Twelfth Angle, which hath signification of scandal and detraction, &c. And the Moon, Cum cauda Draconis; and in Quadrate of Mercury in the Seventh House; a place denoting publick Adversaries, strifes and contentions, &c. apt and proper Arguments hereof, as any Astrologer must needs understand and acknowledge. More plain and speaking testimonies of the Malice of Enemies, cannot in any Nativity be found: as if Mr. Wing had been born into the World on purpose (in matters of controversie) to encounter Men of brutish Principles and Conditions.
 Howbeit, it is eminently known, that Mr. Wing was of courage sufficient, and capable for to resent an injury; and would (upon any good occasion) be so just to himself, (and to the truths that the World was made partaker of, by his happy Pen and Pains;) as to give his Enemies to understand he did not wear his Soul without him;  (Who ever did, that had the grand significators of his Nativity strong?) but could easily vindicate himself from their causless cavils, and scomma's, and their want of ingenuity and charity towards him. (Seneca saith that a man hath so much wit, as he hath anger. And St. Paul alloweth of anger; so that it be limited, and not transported with a desire of revenge. Ephes. 4.) And when (beyond reason) provoked, he did accordingly, (with a spirit of soberness) reply unto those his Antagonists; who were so bold and daring to attempt the lessening of his unblemish'd Fame and Reputation, to (do that which was indeed impossible, and therefore I spare their Names;) make way thereby for the advancement of their own. He also hath the Virgins Spike ascending, and the Moon with the Stars of Apollo: and could not (from thence) but have a great Spirit, and be readily apprehensive, though not revengeful of injuries: And would therefore (in cases of difference) only endeavour to acquit himself, but not calumniate his adversaries. And therefore we may say of him, as it was of another in a like case, Non silet, & silet: He might be said to be silent and passive toward his Enemies in respect of revenge, but not in regard of reproof. And surely herein he is no more to be censured, than the harmless Worm for turning again, when it is most churlishly and injuriously trod on.
 Nor was Mr. Wing singular, or alone, in partaking of the malice of Enemies, or of being unworthily traduced. Mr. Wing's Saviour (who had the same (Vide, Cardan, in Coment. Ptol. Morinu:, in Astrol. Gallica. Gregor:, in Notes on Scripture. Card. Aliac. &c) Ascendent with him) was so served before him. The brightest Sun attracts the basest and most envious exhalations. The great Hippocrates had a Thessalus to oppose him; and Divine Homer met with a Momus and Zoilus. And we know, that there are as many Nebulous and Cloudy-Starrs in the eighth Sphear, as there be Glorious and Shineing ones. No Truth in Heaven or Earth, but hath its Anti-truth. No Day without its Shadow; or Diamond that wants it foyl. Never was any Person famous for any thing yet, but as he met with Favourites, so he found Detractors. And what excellency can we name or think of, that hath been free from opposition or interruption? And therefore it is no wonder, that a man so popular as Mr. Wing, hath met with his Share of affronts and abuses: it should rather have been Recorded a Miracle for him to have missed them. But Mr. Wing was too great a Philosopher, and too good an Astrologer to be concerned or troubled at such vanities. It was a satisfaction to him sufficient, to know that he had justly and fairely demonstrated and advanced the Truth of what he Studied, and therein discharged a good mind. And he having met with the approbation and thanks of the most judicious and knowing, for his great pains and industry, looked upon the ignorant and false attempts of this adversaries to be too sinewless to impare his worth, and their hatred too imbecil and truthless to torment or discompose him.
 (When Mr. Wing first appeared upon the Stage of the world.) He appeared first upon the Theatre of the world in the two and twentieth year current of his Age; beginning then to Write and Print his Annual Books or Almanacks; and as a fit direction for the favouring of such a purpose, the Sun then came ad Sextilem Veneris in Tauro: She being Governess of his Ascendent, and one of the Almutens of his Geniture; and the Sun (the Grand Patron of publick Fame and Glory) located in Septimâ Domo, the great Angle of business and action. And (that which is as remarkable) together with so favouring a Direction, he had a very auspicious Revolution for that year; as you may behold by the following Scheam thereof.
 ------  Astrological diagramIn this Coelestial Figure, you see the Lords of the Horoscope and Medium Caeli, are in their sublimities or exaltations, and in a short quadrate to each other, equivalent to a Sextile; and the one of them in Trine to the Midheaven, and the other casts the same Aspect to the  , or eleventh Angle; and Royal fixed Stars on the prime Cusps of the Scheam. The Lady of the Ascendent at birth (as there) is Almuten of this Revolution, and herein returned to her Radical place, casting a friendly Sextile to Mercury (the Patron of Learning and Books) in the Seaventh House, and a Trine to the Nineth, and Ascendent. It is in all respects a most admirable position of Heaven; and most properly agreeth unto the happy and immortal effects of this Natives Pen.
 (His writings universally esteemed and embraced.) Indeed Mr. Wings writings found a most excellent welcome into the World, among all sorts of ingenious persons: even so great and happy an one, that (at length) in that year, wherein Fifty Thousand of his Almanacks have not sold or gone off, the Company of Stationers (as I have been credibly informed) have esteemed it but a year of an indifferent sale. So universally spreading was this persons Fame, he beginning to write under so happy and Favourable a Revolution and direction. And these his Annual Books or Almanacks, he continued twenty eight years together;  thereby making an addition to his former Reputation, but never growing less, or loosing of any his once purchased Honour. He still gained ground, but never lost any; and not only his Almanacks, but his other more laborious writings also, met with a very happy entertainment and success: So that in type Truth, all persons that have printed and sold his works, as well as those that have bought and read them, are Debtors to his memory and pains. And the Book-seller and Printer as well as the Astronomer must mourn the unhappy loss of Mr. Wing.
 But now, Mr. Wing was not only a good man, and singular good Artist, but he was a kind and loving Neighbour: and for his temperate and sober behaviour and demeanor, was infinitely beloved of all those he lived among: as well of the more Rustical and unpolished sort of people (which generally look upon Astrologers as Conjurors, and Mathematicians as Mad-men;) as of those of the best quality and breeding; obliging the latter by his Ingenuity and Industry in Science; and the former by his Humility, and readiness at all times to do them good. So that the meaner sort of people were always ready to serve him; and the better sort of Persons (Dominus Ascendentis cum domino Medij Caeli dat honeres, & Principum, (aut Magnatum) familiaritates. Ptol. par. p. 132.) to assist and encourage him in any of his Studious attempts. He was a Serious Cordial Friend, and hard to be removed in affection when once he had settled it upon any man; and when he was necessitated to be an Enemy, (being naturally so great a lover of Peace and Friendship) it was as great a trouble to him, as the knowledge of Letters was (pretended to be) to a Noble Roman, when he came to signe  the death of any Offendor. In his greatest provocations, and from the very worst of his Enemies, (as I am informed) he would admit of a Reconcilement upon the easiest terms imaginable: he ever loved to preserve Amity and Friendship, and to crush or banish Enmity and Hatred.
 He was likewise known to be a most careful and loving Husband, and a Kind and Indulgent Father; as appeared both in the Prudent government of his Family in his Lifetime, and by his disposeing and ordering of things at this Death, for the good of his Relict and Children: that they might not (after his Decease) turn Wolves and Tygers each to other; as in too many very good Families (for want of such care and foresight) it is, God knows, too frequently seen; and (when past remedy) too vainly lamented.
 Lastly, Mr. Wing was a man so naturally made for Action, and so much abominating Remisseness and Dulness; that to follow his employments, he often hazzarded his much to be prized Health: he having for near thirty years together, been constantly upon business, riding early and late, in all kinds of weather, wayes, and seasons, which (sine Dubio) was the propinquate cause (at length) of a very great Hoarsness, which began to seize him violently in the beginning of the fortynineth year of his Age, it being a year Climacterical: which Hoarsness was (after some interval of time) attended with a Consumption and Catarrhe; whereof in the moneth of September, 1668. and the twentieth day thereof, when the Moon was in an opposition of Saturn, he ended all his Tedious Labours and Travels, with this his Terrestrial Pilgrimage: And so, receiving an exchange to a better Life, is now at Rest with God.
 Behold, how the Heavens were posited in the Revolution of the Year of his Death; as you may see in the following Sceam.
 ------  Astrological diagramHerein you see the Lord of the Ascendent, and Lord of the Eighth House are applying to a Conjunction, and this upon the Cuspe of the Eighth House in the Radix; and not only so, but they are both of them in a hateful opposition of Mars, and in Quadrate Aspect of Saturn: and the Lady of the Ascendent in the Radix, is, in this Figure returned to the place of Saturn and Oculus Tauri, who were radically placed in the House of Death. Saturn also is by Direction, as well as Position, promittor of Death in this Nativity. All which are as so many Trumpetters of this Natives approaching Fate; which he (instead of being daunted at) welcomed with a great deal of Chearfulness even to the very last. And indeed no man that hath lived well and uprightly, & done good in his Generation (as Mr. Wing had done) need be affraid of Death, or of the knowledge of the time thereof. It was a Blessing that (Facut experiar, Jehovah, finem meum, mensura dierum meorum, quid sit; experiar quam durabilis sum. Psal.) Holy David prayed for, and that St. Paul desired: And although it may be the Sinful mans Terror and Torture to know it, it is the Just mans Joy.
 The Direction that Cut off Life, was the Sun to the Body of Saturn, viz. the meeting of the Hylech and Anareta, in an Anaretical place thus proved.
   degree &min; Longitudo Solis -- aries -- 29. 18. Descensio Obliqua -- 41. 27. Longit. Saturni -- gemini -- 6. 24. Latit. Saturni merid: -- 1. 51. Declinatio Supra terram -- 19. 38. Ascensio Recta Saturni -- 64. 51. Differentia Ascentionalis 26. 9. Descensio Obliqua Saturni 91. 0. Arcus Directionis -- 49. 33. 
If the Learned Ptolomy may be credited, (as indeed why should he not, if he speak truth?) when he sayes, Aphor. 37. That those persons who have Libra or Aries Ascending at their Birth, shall (not need the envy of others to bring them to their ends, but) be the unhappy cause of their own Deaths: (Quorum autem ascendens erit Aries aut Libra, hi mortis suae causae erunt. Ptol. Cent. Aphor. 37.) (although I believe, and all the world knows and is satisfied, that Mr. Wing was not felo de se, as Lawyers speak, being of better principles than to commit a violence upon or against himself; yet,) I am convinced, that (in a charitable and just sense,) he made the Aphorisme good. For, we know his Soul was so set upon business (as before you have heard) that he laboured, not only beyond his strength, even till the last, but against the opinions of his Physicians: not that he conceived in so doing, he any way did hasten or accelerate his Death, but because he hated Idleness: being a man of so unwearied a fancy, that he was Active, and working to the last; and had not Strength and Vigor first left him, he had never left his Employment; for he dyed labouring, even in the middest of his business, as well as his years.
 The worthy Albohali tells us, that if the significators of Death in any Nativity, shall be in domibus vel exaltationibus suis, a malis liberi, erit mors ejus in parentes et proximos suos. And so true we find his words, (for they take full place in Mr. Wings Nativity) that, as Mr. Wings Life did not cross or Contradict the Influences of the Stars, neither did his Death. For he (as the Holy Patriarch Jacob) dyed among his Relations, & received an honourable Interment.
  On the Death of so many Eminent Astrologers, and Mathematicians; and particularly on the Expiration of Mr. Vincent Wing. OUr Mirth and Pleasures leave us for a space,  While Sighs and Tears Usurp upon your place: Behold the Wounds the Stars do give their Friends! "The Fates spare none, may bring about their Ends. First, they force Loyal Neve resign his Breath: Next, Learned Fisk compel to yield to Death: Then, the great Oughtred (in a goodly Age, His part being done) they hurrey off the Stage: Culpeper follows: [The Physicians Foe!] All Astrologians surely are not so. And painful Booker too, they take to's rest. "Angels themselves subscribe -- Ac Mortuus est. But Death not satisfied, unless he, Work a sure Famine in Astrology, And make the world with his Massacres Ring: Hath last of all, remov'd Laborious Wing. Sure Death's turn'd Courtier, will not be deny'd The thing he covets, though the best man Dy'd. Ah! Cruel Tyrant! what ill hast thou done, To bless'd URANIA? her scarce risen Sun Must set, before it the Meridian Mount: What shall we now, of Fair Urania Count? She could have spar'd thee Quacks & Fools good store; Turn-coats and Traitors full as many more: Which Tribe, thy hungry Stomach might suffice; In taking them, thou'dst sav'd URANIA'S eyes: But, at her Friends to cast thy envious Dart, At once strikes Blind and Dead her Eye and Heart. No more Astrologers, since these are gone, Trouble your serious skill, or thoughts upon Poor Mortals Life and Death! Your Period's set; And the Alchocoden that governs it, Must veile to th' Anareta: All your pain, Cannot from it the meanest minute gain! "'Tis Natures privilege to be severe: "And let her reign Triumphant in her Sphear. T. F. Astrophil. 
 Advertisement. Courteous Reader,
 IN the foregoing discourse, you are informed of the Death of the Person of Mr. Wing, but his Fame, that is still surviveing; and this, not only in his own Laborious pieces, emitted into the world in his Life time; but in a Son, he left behind him, who bears his own Name: And is so far inclined to his Fathers Studies, that he hath for this present year 1670. wrote his Olympia Doata, or Almanack; and (by Gods blessing) intends the Annual continuance thereof.
FINIS. 
