REASONS FOR RESTORING THE WHIGS. ------  ------ LONDON, Printed in the Year 1711. Price 6d.
 ------ ------ REASONS for Restoring the WHIGS. NOthing is more generous than to take part with People in Distress, when it is none of their Fault that they are not still in Prosperity. To see a Set of Men run down by the common Cry, even to Contempt, whose Numbers are as formidable as ever, and who continue to maintain the true publick-spirited Doctrines of Revolution and Resistance, to see these despised by those very Men, who do not so much as pretend to have any Defence against such Weapons, is very unaccountable. The Elect do not know what it is to despair: and till that happens, the Tories ought not to triumph. But nothing is surprizing in an Age of Amusements. Whilst some are contending for the very odd Maxim, That they ought to be preferr'd, who would be good Subjects, tho' they were out of Favour: Others are no less idly sollicitous about restoring those, who have the only Pretensions to Power, whether to procure or to keep it. I take it for granted, that the Whigs must and will come into Play again: because they are the only Masters of all those useful Arts and Inventions, by which, under Providence, Turns and Changes are brought about in the World; and therefore since it is, and ever was the Business of that Party, of which I profess my self an unworthy Member, to give intire Satisfaction to all sorts of Consciences, I shall endeavour to prepare my Fellow-Subjects for the Alteration, by laying down the best Reasons for it I can. This I take to be a very good Method, to give Reasons before we come into Power, because we may not perhaps be so much at leisure to do it afterwards. I am sensible, that the Prerogative may make this happy Removal as it formerly did, without giving any Reason for it at all; but since the straining of the Prerogative is notoriously a Tory Device, and because I think all arbitrary Proceedings, especially whilst Tories are uppermost, ought to be discouraged: I shall debate the Matter with all the Calmness and Moderation, that becomes a Lover of Truth, and a hearty Friend to his Country. 
If we have the Welfare of England at Heart, and would gladly be delivered from this long and expensive War, in which we are engag'd: We should wish with Impatience for the Restoration of the Whigs, who are the only Men that can put an End to this Affair with Safety and Honour. The Conduct of the Tories, since they have been at the Helm, will soon convince us of all this. They have taken Care of the Indies, and made a Trade and Advantage of that, which at all Hazards should have been undertaken, I mean the Conquest of South America, which at long run is the Conquest of France; they have provided for Spain, and stopt the growing Debt of the Nation; by which Measures, the War may last some three or four Years longer, unless an unexpected Peace should intervene; whereas, had the Whigs been suffer'd to pursue their Method: Had the growing Incumbrance Risen into a general Dun: Had Spain been starv'd to enable us to take three Towns with six Millions, that cost the French King almost half the Sum for Purchase and Fortifications: Had the Foreign Plunder devolved wholly upon the Dutch, and the Domestick upon their private Allies: Torcy could have banter'd us no longer, tho' the Confessor to the Army, who knows so much of the Management of the War, had himself been in the Secret: But we must have had the invaluable Blessing of Peace; our Creditors would have been sure of their Power for many Generations, by having run us so very deep, and therefore would have no more occasion for the War: There had been an end of all our Troubles, and the Whigs would have stood to their first Word with Honour, and owned the Duke of Anjou with a most profound Submission to Providence, which perhaps might have been mentioned in the Journal. Whereas, under the Tories, how far off is this delicious Prospect? Perhaps we may have a Victory to match Ramellies, Oudenard, and Blaregnies, and so computing Hockstat among the Tory Triumphs, bring the Ballance to that side, whereby we may go on planting Lawrels every Year, till the Grove grow to a Wilderness. The Whigs therefore must be restored, if ever we design to be at leisure to fight altogether among our selves.
 Nor is there less Occasion for them, if we seriously consider the great Necessity there is, of strengthening and keeping up our Foreign Alliances. There is all the Reason in the World to accuse the Tories of great Remissness in this Article. I would not be thought to write for a Party, or to judge out of Prejudice: But let any indifferent Person tell me, whether there does not appear a great Suspicion of Avarice and Narrowness of Spirit in all their Transactions beyond Sea. Little else was regarded in all Treaties, but their own Interest: As if England was to come in Competition with all Europe. If any useful Branch of Trade was in Dispute, they presently claim'd it for themselves; if a Town was taken, they immediately brought in their Partners for Powder and Shot; if a Territory was to be divided, who but they to be the Foremost in the Scramble. If my Memory do not fail me, for I would not wrong them, they once weighed a few Paultry Gunsmiths against the whole States General, and insisted on a meer Punctilio of Honour, with the ever valiant and victorious Portuguese. I appeal to the Knowledge of all who have been conversant in these Affairs, whether there was not a greater Regard paid to our Allies, under the Administration of the Whigs. Did we think it worth our while to Quarrel with a Neighbouring Country for a few nasty Fishes, or the Raree-Show of a Company of Monsters from Africk? When one of our good Allies was overstock'd with Poor, did we not take vast Numbers of them off his Hands, at a Time too, when our own Poor were very numerous, and in a starving Condition, so generous was our Charity without any Regard to our own Profit or Advantage. Is there a Religion in Europe, that has not been encouraged by us here in England? If those, who were troubled with Superstition, would have conceal'd themselves, and been of no Religion at all, rather than of a bad one, they might have been Favourites in our Eyes. Did we not wholly neglect our own Barrier the Seas, and increase that of other People, without any Respect to Self-Interest? And till the same well disposed Persons are restored, must we not be under the strongest Apprehensions imaginable, that the Grand Alliance will soon be broken: and then what do we think will become of the Protestant Religion and Liberties of Europe.
 I suppose the most Hardy and Impudent Tory breathing, will not pretend to dispute with me, whether the Interest of the Hannover Family were not better provided for under a Whig Administration, than under Them. I shall not now mention their slavish Doctrines of Passive Obedience, Non-Resistance, and Hereditary Indefeasable Right, which no doubt must agree admirably well with the Temper and Genius of a German Prince. I would not bring against Them a Railing Accusation; the Cause of the Whigs wants not any such Arms to defend it; our own Actions, done in the Face of the Sun, will witness for us, how much we are concerned for that Illustrious House. By our Behaviour towards the Glorious King William and Her Present Majesty, the Serene Princes of That House may know, what They are to expect. Did we not Limit the Prerogative, and Cramp the Succession Acts, on purpose to get the Power into our own Hands, and into the Hands of those High and Mighty Ephori, whom we had appointed for the Interregnum, on purpose to keep it for their sakes? Have any People been truer to their Oaths and Publick Engagements, than we have been, and can any Thing be a better Security for the Successor to depend upon Us? It is very true, we have endeavoured all we could, to fix the Birthright in another Person. But every Body, who has not a Party-Mist before their Eyes, may easily see, upon what Reasons we went: For how can any one Branch of the Hannover Family ever claim in virtue of this Right, if the Birth of a Prince shall ever be disputed after so much Unquestionable Evidence? It is no strange Thing, to have such Calumnies spirited up against us, whilst we live among Tories. With the same Candor and Ingenuity They object to us, our lessening the Credit of the Succession by Representing Three Parts of the Nation as Enemies to that Family, and in the Interest of the Pretender: and that we Endangered a Bill for strengthening the Succession, by Inserting a Clause, which might very justly admit of a Division; Poor senseless Impotent Malice! How is it possible for the Tories to hope to keep the Saddle long, when they are not able to fathom even the ordinary Depths of our Wisdom and Sagacity? We did indeed Represent the Tories as Enemies to the House of Hannover; but they ever loved to contradict us, and make us Lyars and False Brethren, and This therefore was the only way to bring them to be for it. We own, that Perkin did make an Attempt to invade us, whilst we were in Power, and seemed to have a particular Fancy to land amongst our Allies the Presbyterians; and that much about that Time, we would not let the next Heir come over only by way of a Civil Visit; But had we not just then been accused of making Turns and Revolutions our professed Principle, that we were always inclined to follow and practise? And could we give a greater Demonstration of our singular Stedfastness to the House of Hannover, than by Receding occasionally from our Principles, and from our very Nature, for Their sake, by waving the Right of Revolution, adhering to the Establishment, and sending the Young Gentleman home again: Let the Tories, if they can, produce any one Instance, like these I have shewn, of their Loyalty and Fidelity to that Princely Race. They pretend, that we are for a Commonwealth, and we with more Justice object to them that they are for Arbitrary Power and Tyranny. Do we think a German Prince will not discern the Difference, and how much better it is to Rule a Free-born People, and a Race of Nobles fit to be his Companions, than a Nation of Slaves and Vassals? The Tories must not think to pass these idle Amusements upon a Wise and Judicious Court, which can never save them from Turning out, to make room for the True Patrons of the Succession. We all know whose Legacy it was, and can we suppose, that Legacies were intended for Enemies, and not for Friends?
 There is another Great Concern, I mean the Security of the Protestant Religion, which I am sure can never flourish as it did, till the Whigs are again empowred to take it under their Protection. Nothing can be more surprizing than to hear Jacobites, Highflyers, and Papists in Masquerade, talk of preserving and maintaining the Protestant Religion. As for us, it has been our particular Care, ever since the Peace of Reswick. It was by our Direction, that the Famous Exposition of the Church of England Articles was written, by which the Inclosure and Pale, that had been made up by the Tories, was thrown open, and a large Gap made, at which, under the Conduct of a Religious Naturalizing Parliament, the Fulness of the Gentiles marched in, and by joining Us, made our Forces more than a Match for the Enemy. I have heard it said, that some of These were not Protestants, and that others were not Christians; But did they not renounce Popery in a solemn manner? Did they not swear against Them even in an Unknown Tongue? If This will not make a Man a Protestant, I am at a Loss to know what a Protestant is. Let this therefore be reckoned among the Calumnies of that malicious Party. With what indefatigable Industry have we laboured to bring together, and reconcile under one and the same Protestant Denomination, Deists, Socinians, Atheists, Latitudinarians, Libertines, and Free-Thinkers? And can there be any Thing that can contribute more to the Security of the Protestant Religion, than Unity and Concord? When the Tories talk of one Faith and one Mind, They know, that what they attempt to bring about, it is impossible should ever happen in Nature; Men will differ so long as they are Men; Certainly in the Judgment of all discerning Persons, the Conduct of the Whigs is much the Wisest, by a General Toleration to make it the Interest of all People not to Divide, tho they do Differ; by which means the whole Body of Protestant Dissenters are drawn in for Parties in the Common Cause of the Church against Popery and Superstition; and yet for This we have been called Presbyterians and Fanaticks; and we have met with all the Opposition in the World from the Tories, whose constant Business it was to Divide the Well-affected as fast as we could bring them together. At the Revolution, when the Protestant Religion was in the utmost Danger, whilst the Tories, to their everlasting Shame and Confusion stood out and kept at a Distance from that easy Monarch: We fell in with Him, concerted Measures with his Popish Counsellors, and ply'd him with all those Refined Arts, which Envy it self must acknowledge we are Masters of to a Perfection; by which we brought about that Blessed Turn, and preserved Religion at a Time, when the Slavish Dastardly Tories were preparing themselves for Smithfield Market. If therefore we have any Regard for the Reformation, and are Real and Sincere when we Declare against France and Popery, we should join Hands in behalf of Those, who are the most Professed Enemies to Rome, and Hearty Friends to every thing that is called Protestant in Europe.
 The Gentlemen, who are now in Power, value themselves upon nothing so much, as upon their Loyalty, and Love of Monarchy, whose Rights and Prerogatives they always talk of defending and supporting. But we are not to try Men upon their own Words. I am positive, if the Actions of the Whigs can make a better Proof of their Fidelity to the Crown, it will soon appear who are the best Subjects of the two. The Learned and Judicious Mr. Ferguson, who was always a stanch Whig, whilst Youth and Vigour permitted him to be useful and serviceable, in his Account of The Qualifications of a Minister of State, observes, that a Distrust of themselves was the great Foible of the Family of the Stuarts; but, with Submission, I think, their Distrust of the Whigs was a much greater Foible, who with all the most pathetick and solemn Promises imaginable, could never obtain a Permission to make them Great and Glorious Monarchs. K. James the Second did indeed trust them for a Time; but it was his Misfortune not to trust enough of them; and let any one shew me when any one Tory Corporation or County ever addressed the Throne in such high Terms, as the Whigs did at that Time. They ascribed to His Majesty, not only an absolute Dominion over the Bodies and Goods, but over the very Souls and Consciences of his Subjects. What could be more sincere, than their wishing, that they had Windows in their Breasts, that His Majesty might see the Integrity of their Hearts; and to prove that this was their old constant unalter'd Principle, the Tories themselves own, that if the King could have looked through those Glass Windows into their Breasts, he would have found nothing there but Old Standards and Second-hand Furniture. How loyal a Design was that in the Whigs, to make the Throne a Co-ordinate Power, and how Rudely and Unjustly has it been Misrepresented? Tho' to an Indifferent, Rational Man, nothing can seem a fairer and more ample Concession, than for the Whigs to allow the same Power to Crowned Heads, that ever they pretended to for themselves. Can it ever enter into the Head of any thinking Creature to imagine, that the Whigs should oppose the Prerogative, or any the most ample Claim to Dominion; when not so much as one of the Party can arrive at the Dignity of a Secretary, Treasurer, or Lord Lieutenant, but they presently assume and exercise all that Glorious Unbounded Authority, which the Tories pretend they have disclaimed? By this they cannot be supposed, since they are only Ministers still, to mean any thing else but the Support of the Royal Character, which they represent; which is certainly doing Justice to the Rights of Monarchy. But let the Bigots of the other Party go on to censure them with no more Reason; they will find by Experience, when the long-wish'd for Change comes, that the Whigs are no such Enemies to Soveraignty as they imagine. They have accused them of being the Authors and Abettors of a strange Medley, call'd Mixt Monarchy; but what did they do, when they were uppermost, to deserve this? Did they not push at a Single, Sole, and Total Supreamacy, without any Partners, any Mixture, or Coalition? The Tories vainly dream, that their Passive Obedience and Non-resistance is the shortest Way toward the establishing of Royal Dominion; but they are, as they used to be, extreamly mistaken. Few Monarchs will ever depend upon that Scheme: and besides, it is whisper'd, that they are not in earnest who propose it: For whatever Men resolve when they are in cool Blood, yet, as Mr. Asgill observes, when they are put into a Fright or a Passion, they know not what they shall do. But the surest Way to Monarchical Power, is the Republican System of the Whigs. A short Experiment of this sort never failed to produce as good a May-day Monarch as Heart could wish. Cromwell and Massanello went this way to work; they were Whigs in the making, and Tories when they were finished. If ever therefore there be occasion to restore Monarchy, the Whigs ought to be first restored, to pave the Way to that Design. Their Love of Regal Power is unquestioned; let them go first, and the other will soon follow in course.
 If we Consider the Honour and Dignity of Parliaments, I hope no one will deny, but the Whigs have a much greater Regard to This than the Tories; and This is another Reason that ought to incline every True Lover of our Constitution to wish and endeavour Their Restoration. What an Ornament their Leading Orators and Speakers were to the Last Parliament, the Tories must remember to their Sorrow. The Figure they made, render'd Them but too Formidable, and Hazarded their being made Hereditary, even in spite of their own Principles. They fell by their own Strength, and their Glory was their Ruin. What might not be Expected from such Men, who could win over a Learned and Reverend Bench of Prelates, to the truly Noble and Christian Duty of Self-Condemnation; and reduce Atheists, Deists, and Libertines, at least to a serious Enquiry after the Doctrines of Christianity? How careless were the Tories of the Senatorial Dignity, when they permitted the Liberties of England and Europe to be disposed of by those who subsisted on the nasty Elective Breath of Scot and Lot Men, Greasy Burgesses, and Indigent Potwashers? How much nobler was it, to leave This Mighty Decision to an Honourable Committee, Independent of such Scoundrels? This was truly Great and like Patriots, for none but such Senators were fit to Chuse Themselves! How many of that Order were Quartered upon Paymasters, Receivers, and the Subalterns of the Chequer? How many held Commissions in Commendam with Burroughs? What vast Numbers were out upon Subsistance and at Board-wages? Whilst others Thrived upon Lists, Bounties, and a Competency of Types and Shadows: Whom the Tories, had they been in their Places, would have Deserted and Forsaken in the Queen's Bench and Marshalseas; and what was all this for, but to enable all the Members to support the Dignity of Parliaments? They were truly sensible, how Great and Inestimable the Value of a British Senate was, and therefore staked the Bank, the East India Company, the Treasury, and in short, all that Plunder, which the Saints had laid aside for the Work of the Lord, in purchasing those Rights and Privileges, which the Tories thought worth no more than a Tub of Ale, and a little good Neighbourhood. It was not possible but the most useful Knowledge in Politicks, must be freely propagated in that School, where Youth were regularly trained up: And as the Order of Nature requires, were taught to Speak, before they could either Write or Read. To declare the Events of War, even in spite of Chance: To conceal the growing Debt, by pronouncing the Receivers to have manag'd well, which set the Bankrupcy still further off: And to publish the Royal Banns, tho' they knew that a strict Follower of good Q. Bess must certainly forbid them, were Attempts, strangely Glorious and Heroick: Such as no succeeding Senate must ever presume to exceed. This therefore must be said for the Honour of Parliaments, that tho' a Whig Dissolution is absolutely necessary to retrieve all, and tho' a Whig Parliament must meet again, yet such a Whig Parliament will scarce ever meet at Westminster.
 Every Body knows, that we are a Nation subsisting upon Trade and Merchandize, and that the Moneyed Interest is much too heavy for the Land, in the Ballance of the Publick Accounts. I need not tell the World, how much the Whigs have encouraged Trade: And that till They are Restored, we must never expect to see it prosper and flourish. For did not the Tories clamour against the Bank and East India Company, for not transmitting those vast Sums to Flanders or the Indies, where only Foreigners would have been the better for them, which they chose rather to spend in our own Burroughs and Corporations, for the Encouragement of the English Manufactures? I am sorry to say, that such a Practice as this, wants no Colours in the Description, to set it off to the Life. How many Noble Branches of Commerce have been lately sunk, and totally lost? The Premiums for Remittances are considerably abated: The Trafficking with the Debts of the Navy, the vast and profitable Trade to the Straights of Change-Alley, the Split-stick Income, and prodigious Importation of Privy Seals, the Augmentations for Secret Service, the Draw-backs upon Small-beer and Hopps, the Noble Manufacture of the Spanish Wooden-Legg, the Trade of War and of Peace, of Unions and Alliances, the great Advantage of Battles and Sieges, are all in extreme Danger: And God only knows how soon they may be at an end. And who are the Men, whom we are to thank for all this? I need not name the Tories: Every one will fix it upon them: Let them take it off if they can. How did they trump up the South Sea Company upon us, at a Time, when our East India Men began to dream of making both Worlds their own: And that all those, who before the late Whimsical Election, deserved to be sent to the Plantations they had purchased, would once more come to be necessary at Home. Nay not content with this, did they not set up the African Company to be another Rival in Trade, at a Time too, when the Bank wanted to recover its Lustre: Whose Elective Monarchs had been so lately a Match for the Hereditary, and wanted but a few Points to get over, to be in a Capacity of bidding Money for the Patron of England, and erecting themselves into a Bank of St. George. Did they not bring in French Wines for Tory Healths, to the great Detriment of the Herefordshire Trade, whereas we managed the Correspondence to so much greater Advantage, by the way of Holland and Sussex? If this be not sufficient to prove, how much Trade has been discouraged by the Tories, let the many indigent Families, that pine and labour under their numerous Oppressions, witness against them; let the Sir James's, Sir Gibby's, Sir Harry's, with the Illustrious House of Farnese, rise in Judgment against them, who must now starve for want of the other odd Plumb. I know very well, what the Fable of the Fox and the Flies means; I wish every Body else knew it as well; certainly they would never trust the Trade of the Publick with those, who have no Stock, who are empty and craving; whereas the Fat and Well-fed should, one would think, be much fitter for the Business; but this is easily evaded: They say, that Hunger is not so insatiable as Avarice: And that what we call our Wealth, is only the Arrears of the Parish, in the Hands of the old Overseers, which they can demand at Pleasure; see the Insolence and Folly of the Men! How ridiculous is it to say, they will not trust us, when they know, we must trust them, or they can never go on with their Trade. Here indeed I must drop the Argument: For I do not wish to see the Whigs restored, till press'd by Necessity, and the Want of such Managers, the poor distressed Tories come with an awkward Face, and humbly intreat us to take the Shop, the Remainder of the Goods, the Book-Debts, and all the Trade into our own Hands. Again; then we shall soon see, whether the Proprietors of the Dunghil, or its Offspring, are most likely to grow fat and prosper.
 There has of late been more Noise and Preaching about the Church, than ever was made in it, and all against the poor Whigs: Whereby great Numbers of the Well-meaning Layety, and even of the Clergy themselves, have been drawn into an ill Opinion of them: As if they were Enemies to the Established Religion, and intended the Hurt, if not the Ruin, of the Church of England; we have indeed tried her more than once, even as Silver is tried, but was not this for her Glory? Was she ever purer, or ever more flourishing, than in the Days of Primitive Christianity? And was not that an Age of Trials to the Church? I hope it can never be suppos'd, that Men of our Principles, could have a Design to advance or promote any other Religion; whilst the Tories by lifting the Church too high, by mounting her upon a Hill and an Eminence, have made her as a Mark and a Butt, whereby she is apparently seated in a Place of Danger, exposed to every Assault; such a Situation as this, is no better than a -- Praeceps immane Ruinae -- I should be glad to hear one of that Party tell me, whether their erecting Fifty Churches by Act of Parliament, or our filling them by a General Comprehension, be the more meritorious Work of the two; I am sure, no Tory can say the first is the best of the two, without preferring StoneWalls and Steeples before the Congregation, a dead Church before a living. What a ridiculous Coil have they kept about the Doctrines of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance; could any thing be more for the Service of the Church, than giving the Clergy a Power to defend it? Is not this delivering the Sword to St. Peter, and raising a Church Militia, whereby she may be able to combat her great Enemies, the Papists and Presbyterians? Who are the Men, that do most Honour to the Church, they who represent her as a poor, disconsolate, weeping Virgin, pining and forsaken: Ridicul'd by her own Sex, and tamely ravished by ours: Or we, who dress her up as becomes a Warfaring Amazon, with the whole Armour of the King of Hosts whom she serves, able and prepared to defend her self, to make Princes bow down to the Dust of her Feet, to subdue the Kingdoms of the Earth, which have so long been promised her, to bind their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Links of Iron? When Men will wilfully shut their Eyes against their own Good, and stubbornly refuse to see, or to know their own best Friends, I can't think it possible, but they must be often in Danger, and at last inevitably ruined; what could we be supposed to mean by our hearty Endeavours, to join the Church and the Presbyterians, but to strengthen and establish their Power and Interest? The Presbyterians are a Warlike Religion, the greatest Masters of Military Discipline of any Church in Europe: Such an Allie would have been of singular Use to a declining Clergy, had they been at leisure to consult their own Happiness and Security. We own, we gave a considerable Check to Convocations, scarce permitted them to meet, and never suffer'd them to sit, and we glory in the Management; by this we gave the Church a Demonstration, how much we had her Safety and Honour at Heart, when we would not be Accessary to those unnatural Broils and Contentions, which so often endanger her Peace, nor put it into the Power of the Clergy to destroy one another. Can it ever be imagined, that when the first and leading Prelates of the Church were all along in the Secret with the Directors of the Junta, They should not make themselves Masters of all that Fineness of Politicks, that might preserve the Ecclesiastical Constitution, which we had practised with such Success for the Security of the Civil? Did we not by allowing Occasional Conformity, bribe over a great many of the Church's profess'd Enemies to her Communion? And how many Butteresses can we boast of, as useful as their Pillars? If any other Sett of Men can produce the same Evidence of their sincere Love of the Church and Clergy, we shall not then envy their being so much in Favour. In the mean time, let them pray for our Restoration, as they value the great Assertors of the Revolution, by which she was saved miraculously, and thereby reserved for greater Things, if she will be advised, and submit to her best Guides, who would enlarge her Borders, and make no Distinction between her spiritual Governours, and the Kings and mighty Men of the Earth.
 When the Whigs fell, many of those Firm and well-contrived Underprops were taken away, which Supported and Adorned the Political Structure: and I would be glad to know, what the Tories have substituted in their Room, or how the Building will stand, unless the Old Master Workmen are again trusted with the Undertaking. Could any thing be of greater Use, a more Loyal and Publick-spirited Institution, than the KitKat? By this Society, the Standard and Measures of Wit were allowed and approved, and the whole Coinage of Libels and Lampoons managed to the greatest Advantage of the Publick. Hence Orders were Issued to the Authors, and Prohibitions to the Criticks; and by these Means the Throne and Ministry were not only preserved from the secret and open Attacks of Pamphlets and Satyrs, but the Reputation and Beauty of the Fair Circle were secured from the Insults and Evil Intentions of Time, Nature, or Scandal, with all their Adherents and Abettors. What was the Junta, but a Curb to the Growing Prerogatives of Parliaments, a Spur to Deliberating Generals, a Purgative to a retentive Treasurer, and a careful Guardian and Protector of the Crown? To see a Member of this Noble Assembly, Condescendingly step down to the Cabinet or Privy Council, must call to our Memories some of the famed Instances of Humility in the Old Triumviri, Archons, or Ephori. And if from this Pinnacle, we Descend to the Cellar; even there we shall find a Set of Patriots, no less careful of the Publick Welfare. Their constant Study was, to Countermine the Plots and Contrivances of their Country's Enemies; to Discover Treasons unthought of before, and to prevent even the Premeditating a Conspiracy. How slender a Defence of the Crown would the Law prove, without Witnesses? and how happy a Contrivance was it, to prepare These beforehand? Judges are Commissioned, Juries Empannelled, and why not Evidences Provided, that the Cause may be neither Baulked nor Delayed? Only They, who dare not stand this Test, will be against it. Let Little Officers, who will not Tell more than they Know, or Secretaries, who will presume to Know more than their Betters, tremble at this Judicatory: We need no other Proof of its being the strict Method of Justice, when Those, who will not be Whigs, that is, will not be Honest, are afraid of it. By these Arts, and these Associations, that Loyal Party secured the Throne, the Publick and Themselves. Can the Tories boast any Instances of Wisdom and Justice equal to These? I did not mention the Illustrious Assemblies of Treason-Chamber and Somerset House, where only the Names of the Members are sufficient to give a Lustre to the Society, without mentioning their Laws, Orders, or Original Foundation. Let the other Party produce Their Councils and Synods; what Underprops can They lend the Throne or the Publick? Where are Their Meetings, and whom do they consist? Will they upbraid us with Her Grace's Assembly, as worthy to be Compared with any of ours? Will This vie with the Kit-Kat? Will a little Harmless Tea so blind the Eyes of a Lover, that he shall see Bloom in a Whig Junquil, or curse the Union of the Lilly and the Rose in a Tory? Can they Boast of making an Alderman a Wit, or depriving a Revolted Poet of his Genius? Did they ever Tumble a Duke down Stairs, or make a Compleat Beauty out of a Tallow Candle? What Satyrs, Libels, Lampoons, have they given their Imprimatur to? Shew me that Crown'd Head that is the Worse, or that Rebel that is the Better for 'em. By what Authority do they meet? who is their Protector? What Gods have they Demolished, and what Demigods placed in their Room? Or will they presume to shew us their Fam'd October Club? A Self-created Creature, as much below a Parliament, as our Junta was above it. Shall a few Whetters be compared to Those, who drank all, and yet were not satisfied? Shall a Squadron of Knights and Squires, whom we had long since Drained, compare with Those who Glory in their Spoils? Sometimes indeed, they are Elevated into the Imitation of our Genius, and then they Deviate into Whigs, answer their own Questions, and put the Negative upon Themselves; but in their ordinary Capacities, they can only Blacken a Name, where we could Erase one; can only Design a Model of that Scaffold, which we could Finish. Such are the Supports the Tories lend the Government, such their Councils and Assemblies! How soon will they vanish, when our Morning comes again; when instead of their stale Accounts of the Constitution, Protector, Junta, and Kit-Kat, shall be the Great Political Mystery.
 That which confirms me in my Belief, that the Reign of the Tories will be short, is, because they do all they can to Lessen the Number of their Subjects, and to look upon the Dissenters as scarce Naturalized. The World knows their Settled and Professed Dislike of the Toleration: and it should seem unnecessary to vindicate the Whigs upon this Article, which makes another very good Reason for their Restoration. Was it possible for us to shew the Dissenters in a better Light, or to make them appear more worthy of the Indulgence the Law has given them, than by convincing them of the Necessity they lay under, to Practise that most Charitable and most Christian Duty of Occasional Conformity? Could we give a better Security to their Party, than by Increasing their Numbers; an Argument, which they never failed to make the best Use of they could, and by placing Deists, Socinians, Libertines, and Free-thinkers, in the same Rank with them, and putting both under the favourable Protection of the very same Statute? Did we not fling them in a Flying Squadron of those called Moderate Men, who did them a World of Service, tho' their Principles and those of the Dissenters were at the utmost Opposition: For by appearing chiefly on that Side, they strengthen'd that Party, and served to amuse the Enemy? Did we not Encourage the Reformation Acts, whereby the Saints, whose Sins lay quite another way, sucked no small Advantage out of those Iniquities, which themselves least followed and admired? We saw and considered well, the antient Enmity between the Presbyterians and Independents: How they Reviled, Persecuted, and Clawed one another, till we timely Interposed, Reconciled both Sides, put Independent Congregations under Presbyterian Teachers, and made them one Church, and brought even Contradictions to meet for their sakes, whilst the Northern Kirk laughed at the Motly Monster, and we were content to bear their Reproaches. Did we not bring some of them over to the Doctrine of Lawn Sleeves, and how much was that for their Advantage? How much greater therefore are our Pretensions to their Favour, than those of the Tories? For which Reason, we call upon them to fight our Battels, and to exert themselves and the Courage of their Ancestors in our Behalf, and to bring about another Happy Restoration.
 As no Set of Men do more cordially Profess to humour the People in all reasonable Requests than the Whigs; so they are abundantly prepared to Gratify the present Cravings and Importunity of their antient Allies, the Multitude. How many hearty Promises did the Tories make them, that they should have a Holyday for St. Giles's and Tower-hill, together with a sufficient Quantity of Roast-meat to their October? But these things are utterly forgotten now they are in Power, and should think of Performances. They begin to argue now, that the Guilt of a Publick Plunderer is his Best Security; that Necnons are a Plea sufficient to overthrow the strongest Charge; that the Condemning the Rich is without Precedent; and that the worst Malefactors are pitied at the Gibbet. Whereas, if the Whigs were once restored, they would soon find a Way to oblige them, who know so well how to punish False Brethren, and to manage a Decent Execution to advantage. Do we think, they would Permit those Criminals to escape, who built a Scaffold for their own Party; and put an End to a well-established Usurpation with a Prodigious Farce? Can we believe, that they would ever forgive those Pettycoat Party-men, who staked the Cause of the Lord and his Saints, against a Tea-table Quarrel; and put it upon the same Lay with a Dispute about Commodes and Furbeleaus? They know but little of the Temper and Wisdom of the Whigs, who think they will not be ready at any time to deliver up to the Paws of the most Lyon-like Tories, All Those, who falsly assumed that Venerable Name, and debased their Party under the Impudent Pretence of Modern Improvements: and basely went off from the Good Old Cause, and the Gallant Principles of the Ludlows, the St. Johns, the Hambdens, the Sidneys, and Harringtons; Men that were Born in worse Times, and yet behaved Themselves much Better. Can we see the Union turned against us, and Those who used to be First in the Cause, now servilely Truckling to the Tories, and taking their Pay instead of their Plunder, and not sufficiently resent the Folly, and as heartily prosecute their Treachery, who would not draw the Union closer, and with a handsome Equivalent make our Brethren Whigs as well as Britons? Now at length our Eyes are open; and we may discern of what Species our famed Converts are; we may easily see the old Leven of the Tories still prevails in them, and that they took Refuge with us, only because they were rejected at St. Germains: If therefore our honest Friends in Holborn and Moorfields, have a Mind to a Procession; let them Restore the Whigs, and I'll engage, they shall have it at the Expence of our own Party.
 How can we ever expect to see Moderation, the most lovely of all Christian Vertues, flourish again, unless the Whigs are Restored? The Tories do not so much as name This Vertue amongst Their Party, but with Abhorrence; and how did they oppose and revile us, whenever they found us inclined to practise it? When out of a vast Number of Papists and Jacobites, we singled out but one to make an Example, Ex post facto, How was our Moderation misrepresented? When we aimed at an utter Expulsion, and declared openly for Root and Branch: Being resolved not to leave so much as one Tory either in the Executive or Legislative Branch, with what Invectives did That Rampant Party open against our Clemency? And yet how Great was our Mercy, who were only contented not to Prefer, instead of Punishing as we ought, the profest Enemies of the Publick? When we Tolerated every thing but One or Two Articles of the Church, Justice it self could not preserve our candid Proceedings from being Reflected on. Others might punish every thing, and remit nothing, and yet claim the Character of Upright Patriots: We granted a General Indulgence, and only put a Restraint upon two or three Crimes, and yet are call'd Bigotted and Intemperate. What Tryal, what Debate, what Publick Cause, was there, in which we had not a very tender Regard for our own and the Nation's Friends? With what Face then can they complain of our Want of Moderation? Is it usual for Men to talk perpetually of Moderation, and to sound scarce any thing else from the Senate, the Bench, the Bar, the Press, and the Pulpit; if they never intended to practise any such Duty? Can we be thought so mad as to accuse the Tories, when they presume to inquire into any Backslidings of the Faithful, of the Want of Moderation, if we did not believe there was such a Vertue? Take a View of us in the Proceedings and Conduct of our Viceroys, our Secretaries, our Judges, our Bishops, and all our Subalterns, and then accuse us of failing in this Duty if you can? In short, give us the Power again, if you would try our Temper: For so fond were we of Moderation, that we had a Spice of it even in our Manners, our Sense, our Good-nature, our Honesty, our Religion.
 Let the Union, which wants so much to be Establish'd and Fortified, be another Reason for Restoring the Whigs; who first contriv'd it, happily accomplish'd it, and seem to have a Title to take Care of it, as a Child of their own. Is it reasonable, that the Tories should step in, and reap the Fruits of our Labours? That they should run away with the Glory of a Treaty, and leave us the Shame of a Confederacy? Must we lose a convenient Place to land our New Revolutions in? Did we for this send for them of the North to be Catechiz'd under our Secretaries, that they should revolt, and go to the Episcopalians for Confirmation. I appeal to that truly Learned and Honest Statesman, Mr. Daniel de Foe, who has so bravely attempted to free that Nation from the last Resort to England, and so boldly advanc'd our English Lords to a Degree of Honour, surpassing Turks, Indians, and other inferiour Trucebreakers; nay, has compar'd them even to the King of S--, Whether now the Honey-Moon is over, and the Jointure and separate Maintenance settled, the Bride, as he well expresses it, be not as willing as We to part? Does he not assure us, That We united with them as Presbyterians? And are not Presbyterians Whigs? Now if they turn Tories, how can the Treaty be observ'd, unless We are again Restor'd, and Put into a Power and Capacity of Keeping Them Right?
 But there is another prevailing Argument, that ought to plead for Us: I mean, the due Application of that Noble Invention, call'd a Sponge. Let the Tories deny if they dare, that the Whigs were the Authors of this curious Device, and in how critical a Juncture was it found out? Just as the growing Debt of the Nation was Rising to so prodigious a Sum, as must make that Admirable Rarity of immediate Use and absolute Necessity. Whereas under the Dilatory Conduct of the Tories, the long Entail of Debts under which the Nation groans, is in a fair Way to be secur'd: Our Merchants who have studied the Wars so long, are now like to be paid the dull old Way of Interest and Principle, without any Prospect of shorter Methods: Not the least Hopes of Plunder are left them: Nor so much as the airy Appearance of a New Revolution, tho' they have been Wrangling and Quarrelling for it ever since the old one.
 If we are not to be restor'd to all our Power, yet trust us only with the White Staff, with the Magician's Rod; for what Tory of the Pack, Red hot or Moderate, will ever handle it to so good an Advantage, or do so many Romantick Feats with it as when it was in our Hands? It fortified those who were within the Circle, and made those without dance after us to no Purpose. Was there ever a nobler Piece of Enchantment acted in the Hay-market? Did we not raise Castles, build Fleets, kill Giants, destroy Monsters, erect Palaces, mount Witches upon Broomstaves, and employ Devils without Number? And was it not reasonable we should be paid for a Raree Show, so wonderful and surprizing? Let others raise Millions to end the War, we did it to carry the War on. It is true, the Present Sett of Men write a good Hand, understand Accounts, and can form a Ballance or Sum Total to Admiration: Give us the Power then; make us the Squires, and let them be our Stewards and Baileys. I am sure, if we are not soon reinstated in the Treasury and Exchequer, the Tories will begin a most terrible and bloody Persecution; and no less than the total Overthrow and Massacre of the Whigs will satisfy them: for what a Temptation will it be to that honest Party to desert, when it is no longer for their Interest to be Whigs? Tho' they cannot be Trusted, yet they will Trust, which is bad; where Seven or Eight per Cent. is the Reward of their Faith, the Tories are sure to cut them off at a Blow; For where their Treasure is there will their Heart be also.
 Have we any Regard to sweet English Freedom? any Detestation of Chains and Slavery? Let the Whigs be Restor'd; the great Patrons and Supporters of Liberties. Whilst they Reign'd was there any Complaining of Oppression? any extraordinary Business at the Old Baily, the Secretary's Office, or before the Attorney General, or Serjeant at Arms? Were there any accumulative High Crimes, any constructive Treasons, or any Scandal by Interpretation? Was there any Dread upon the Subject from Committees of Affections, or of Examinations? Did not the Press, and the Bar, and all Sorts of Pulpits, run Riot as they pleas'd? The Church, the Throne, the Mitre, together with the dead Letter of the Law and the Gospel were not exempted: All the Restraint was, that no one should teach Fundamentals, or should libel the Saints and the Elect, and was not this just and reasonable? But to what Extravagances of Tyranny are the Tories now hurrying? If we Whigs do but sin over our old Precedents, and claim the Rights and Liberties, which, because they were our own, we very equitably denied to others; presently they step in, and plead those very Laws, and would inflict those very Penalties, which we made and settled, as if they, forsooth, the sworn Enemies of the Government, were upon a Level with its best Friends and Supporters? Nay, are they not making what Haste they can to Remove those Incumbrances which lay hard upon the Crown, which we plac'd there, on Purpose to embarrass the Prerogative, and make the Assertors of Liberty necessary, and fit to have all the Power? These the Tories are now throwing off, and ungratefully attempt to load them on our Shoulders, who despise their Malice, and at the same time laugh to see their Folly, in admiring and contemplating the happy Union between Majesty, Goodness, Piety, Compassion, and Tenderness, whilst they want the Sense to improve a Royal Foible: and know not the right Use they ought to make of those convenient Vertues, tho' they have our Instructions ringing in their Ears, and our Examples fresh in their Memories. 
Let any of the Hack-Writers among the Tories tell me, whether they ought not to be restored to Power, who best know how to keep and defend it? How can they expect to stand long, who are so easily blown down with every Puff of Wind? Whereas we, who make Storms, can abide them. A civil Message, a Frow, a short Billet, or even the Blasting of the Breath of the Royal Nostrils, could send the poor heartless Tories packing; and deprive them of all; whereas we stood out manfully, bullied the State, defied, swagger'd, talk'd of our Generals, our Admirals, our Rights, our Riches: Appealed to the Army, cried out for Help to Holland, bid the Bank stand by us, and like brave Champions, neglected nothing that was for our Honour and Safety; and here I must beg leave to make use of the Prince of Conde's Words upon another Occasion, How well do such Men deserve Power, who could so bravely defend it! What have we done, that we did not and do not still justify? Have they convinced us of any one Fault? They must be shallow Politicians indeed, who can believe, that since we were turned out with so much Difficulty, we shall not find it easy to come in again.
 There is an Argument, upon which the Roman Catholicks value themselves more than upon any other; they say, that Protestants allow Salvation in their Communion, tho' the Papists deny Salvation in a Protestant Communion; when it is much the safest way to be a Papist: Because both Sides agree, that he may be saved: Whereas the Protestant has only the Word of his own Party for his Security: And this Argument gives the Catholicks much the best of the Lay. Now tho' the Whigs have all the Aversion in the World to Popery; yet they never thought it a good way to take Advice of an Enemy, and to learn his Ways; Reason is to be heard from whatever Quarter it comes: And therefore with a great deal of Justice, they have palmed the very same Argument upon the Tories; we deny them the very Power and Possibility of being honest Men or good Subjects: And we have good Grounds for this, how otherwise would such a Practice consist with the great Duty of Moderation, which every Body knows we profess. And according to this Perswasion, when we were in Power, we would not leave so much as one of them in the Ministry. But on the other Hand, the Tories, tho' they clamour at the very Word Moderation, do not deny us the Possibility of being good Subjects: For when they are in, they admit great Numbers out of our Party, to be Partners of their Power; trust, caress, and believe us, let us into the Secret, and divide the Profits with us; when a Man therefore turns Tory, he runs much the greatest Hazard of Exclusion: But all is Rugg, as the Gamesters say, with the Whigs; and this is another never failing Reason, why the Whigs will, and shall, and must prevail. 
Great has been the Triumph of the Rampant Party, upon the going off of the Mob from their antient Allies; and after they were raised by us, declaring for the Enemy. It was pleasant, to see us raking in the old Tory Pamphlets, for Railery against Tumults and Rabling: tho' upon the first Importation of a few Colours from Flanders, and the Assurances given us by Irish Tom, who had fixt the Time to May-Day, we firmly believ'd, we should have them again on our Side: and then those Reasons and Raileries would revert to their first Owners. However a Reason is good, if it serves the Turn but for ten Days; and tho' by our Moderation, we suffer'd the Parsons to pass among their Neighbours for ordinary Monsters, and little Devils only of about two Years old, so that the Rabble began to think 'em very good Play-Fellows; and tho' we made such a Noise and Ostentation of our Wealth, that our loving Subjects began to think of claiming their Part in the Plunder: Yet now these things are all over, we have stood the Shock much better than the Tories used to do, when they were attack'd by the very same Weapons; and there is all the Reason to believe, that the Tories will soon take their Turn; for that Poverty we have brought and entailed upon the People, will soon make them mutiny against their present Directors, tho' they are not in Fault, before they can retrieve our Mismanagement. The Octobrians, as the hot Weather comes on, will perhaps begin some Gambol or other, dress a Scare-Crow for us, or it may be, give us some very great Rogue or Raparee in Distress, as bad as our selves, that we may have Pitty upon him. When other People get to be as rich as we are, there will be many Mouths watering at them too: Especially, if they have the same Occasion that we had, to proclaim our Wealth, and let the World know where our Mines lay. Whatever happens, the Mob must be with us, and bring us in again like a mighty Torrent; for it is not to be expected, they should part with their old Friends for a hasty Word, or for one rash and inconsiderate Action. 
We have been told indeed, that our Political Lies and Pious Frauds were ill Contrived, and worse Managed; and that at present we are utterly exhausted. The Ingratitude of the Tories is indeed in this Case never to be Palliated or Allowed for; when they gave out, that we were Enemies to the Church, that we were Fierce, Immoderate, Implacable in our Tempers, that our Avarice was Insatiable, and we should Spoil, Plunder, and Devour all that came in our Way, and that we were Enemies to the Prerogative, and Hereditary Insulters of Monarchy: We did them the Favour to make their Words good in every Particular, so soon as ever it came to the Tryal; but when we represented them as Papists, French-men, Jacobites, Tyrants, Perkinites, and Blood-suckers; they gave the Lie to every Name, so soon as ever it was in their Power; pursued the War with France, were hearty for the Succession, secured the Publick Debts, declared for the Indulgence to Dissenters, and even let Us go unpunished. But what then? Tho' this Bite failed, have we not another? Are we so exhausted? Did we not presently give out, that they never intended all this, but comply'd with it, because they found it necessary at present: Tho' we knew there was no Proof but our Scandal, that ever they intended otherwise? Did we not assure the World, that some of their Leaders were Whigs in Masquerade, tho' we know, that They know that we would have Hanged them as the worst of Tories, who never herded with us, but to Betray and Undermine us, and that we shall never forgive them the Late Turn? And did we not presently trump up a Distinction of Old and New Whigs, and give out that the New Whigs, most of which were of the Late Ministry, were False Brethren, and as such ought to be divested; and that most of the New Ministry are Old Whigs, and ought to be joined to the Old Whigs of the Late Ministry, so that it may be a Whig Ministry still? Have we not perswaded the Town, that the October Men, and their Adherents, are Mortal Enemies to the Present Ministry, tho' we know the secret Correspondence between them, and that their Demands are Concerted; and then, because of their Numbers, made the Pretence to Ruin us, as if the Ministry could not help it? And after all these pretty Inventions, are we Exhausted? are we Drained? Has not the Town bob'd at these Baits, swallowed the Gudgeon, and listened to our Pamphleteers? and may we not reasonably hope to be restored, since we Practice our Old Arts with such Success, and our Good Genius has not forsaken us?
 I could mention several other Reasons, that may induce us to Believe, we shall soon have another Turn in our Favour; such as the Great Power of Money, which is so much the Property of our Party, and which may be turned to a very good account, e'er it is accounted for, and the exorbitant Surplusage Refunded. Besides this, the great Increase of our Necessary Women, who are so apt to do good to the Distressed; as also the Method of the Tories, who take all Advantages of the Divisions between the Old and New Whigs, the Subscribers and Those who stand out, as we did of their Divisions: Who erect Clubs to promote their Interest by a Pretended Opposition; and in short, give into a great many of our Measures, which may at last lead them into those that Ruined Us. But I wave these Considerations: Those I have already mentioned, are sufficient for the Consolation of our Friends, and the Terror of our Enemies.
 More might be said, if the Times would bear it; and less could not have been said, without wronging a Good Cause, which God, in his own Good Season, will take Care of. I hope it will one time or other be Remembered to my Advantage, That I have Dared to be Honest in a Villanous Age, and to appear boldly in the Face of the World, an Advocate and Defender of the Injured and Oppressed, who yet have Deserved other Usage from their Country. Others could write of Publicola, Aristides, Atticus, and Epaminondas, when they Flourished and were at the Head of Affairs: My Task has been to acknowledge and proclaim their Merit, and with it the Ingratitude of their Country, now they are Distressed and Forsaken. Every body sees to what a Monstrous Pitch, the known Insolence of the Tories is already Risen; for which Reason, it would have been inexcusable Hardiness in me to Publish my Name to the World, and thereby Expose my self to their Fury. I reserve my self for a Better Fate; tho' in Handling the Subject, I have not Spared Them: and if they should Discover me, am Prepared for the Worst that their Fury and Mad Zeal can Invent.
 I expect a great many Answers to what I have written, and that I shall be attack'd with all the Ill-manners, Billinsgate, and Railery, which are so natural to the Tories: But I hope my Readers will provide against it, as well as I do, and will learn to Despise Ill-Language, and listen only to strict Fact and sound Reason. For my own Part, my Conscience is my Support; I have the AEs Triplex about me, with which the Whigs have so long stood the Shock of all their Enemies. I am conscious I have done my Duty, and leave the rest to Providence. I am sure, this is not a Time for the Whigs to sit still, and hold their Tongues, under the Discipline of their TaskMasters. I have broken the Ice, and expect that all Lovers of Truth and Friends to the Constitution should stand by, and assist me. Let the Examiner and his Brother Abel begin the Fray if they please; if they will keep close to the Subject, and argue upon the Principles of Reason and Justice, I shall attend to and answer them; but if they stick to their usual Talents of railing and calling Names, as I shrewdly suspect they will: I shall no more mind such Barkings, than if I were actually placed in the Sphere of the Moon, quite out of hearing the Clamour they make.
 When I first undertook this Subject, I gave the Rough Draught of it to a very Eminent Tory, to peruse; agreeable to the Humour of his Party, he was in a great Heat, railed incessantly, and threatned me with an Answer. If he holds in that Mind, upon the first Appearance of his Pretended Confutation, I shall be ready with a Reply; of which timely Notice shall be given in the Review or Observator.
 ------ FINIS. 
