SCRIPTURE Vindicated FROM THE MISINTERPRETATIONS OF THE Lord Bishop of BANGOR: In his Answer to the Dean of WORCESTER's Visitation SERMON CONCERNING CHURCH-AUTHORITY.
------
By FRANCIS HARE, D.D. Dean of Worcester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.
------
LONDON: Printed for Jonah Bowyer at the Rose in St. Paul's Church-Yard, and Sold by J. Roberts in Warwick-Lane. 1721.

THE PREFACE.
SOON after the Bp. of Bangor's Answer came out, the Attention of the Town was so wholly turned from Books to Matters of another nature, and still is so; that the Reader, I believe, will be more apt to ask why I reply at all, than why I have not done it sooner. Instead, therefore, of troubling him with the reasons of my not doing it before, I will only say, that I write now, because I promised in the Postscript to my Sermon , I would, more than for any other reason; otherwise I should have chosen to be still silent, rather than help to the revival of a Controversy, that seemed to be dead, and buried in the vast Abyss, that has swallowed up almost every thing else.
To the Business therfore, without more Apology. And here I might, after the example of the B. but with much greater reason, endeavour to excite the Compassion of the tender-hearted Reader, with long and loud Complaints of his unkind Usage of me, who besides all the other Arts of an unfair Adversary, has many peculiar to himself, which the World are now so well acquainted with, that no Reader can be a stranger to them; but I have so little occasion for such Artifices, that I shall begin with returning his Lp. my most hearty Thanks, for those very Things which are the justest matter of Complaint.
And first, I thank his Lordship for setting out in the very Preface of his Answer, with one of the most palpable Instances of Insincerity a Man can well be guilty of. I had said, "I could not think it equitable in the Governors of the Church, to call in the secular Arm, to oppress and crush under its weight Virtuous and Learned Men, for the mistakes their disinterested pursuits of Truth and Knowledge may happen to lead them into." The sense of this Passage is so plain, that no body can mistake it, who does not do so wilfully. The Opposites to Virtuous and Learned, are Vicious and Ignorant. I ask no favour for the Writing of the Learned, if they are not Virtuous; nor for those of others, who are not Learned, for what business have the Ignorant and Unlearned to write in Controversies of Religion? And if Learned Men write in opposition to the Established Religion, who are not confessedly Persons of Integrity and Virtue, there may be just reason to suspect, that under the colour of Conscience, and a pretended love of Truth, they serve some Party-Views, and design either to promote Impiety and Irreligion, or to disturb the Peace and Welfare of the State. The advancing novel, or the opposing the received Doctrines in Religion, have generally that malignant influence on the Civil Government, that the Magistrate can't have too watchful an Eye upon them, tho' his Care were confin'd to the Affairs of Civil Life, and he had as little Zeal for the Honour of God, or as little obligation to such a Zeal, as has been of late publickly contended for. Indulgence therefore, in my humble Opinion, is then only due in these matters, not when Men write with great Confidence and little Reason on their side, but when their Modesty and Diffidence of themselves, and Deference to Authority, are great and visible; and the reasons they give for their Opinions are solid and strong, and such as shew they have well considered their Argument; that is, they must be Virtuous and Learned Men; otherwise they will want either the good Qualities, or the Abilities they ought to have. And this, one would think, is so very reasonable, that if it could not procure his Lp.'s Concurrence, it might, at least, have escaped his Censure. But his Lp. is so much out of humour, that Virtuous, and Vicious, are terms that pass for nothing with him; and I am represented as claiming Favour only for the Learned; but for the Ignorant and Unlearned, persecute them who will, I have nothing to say against it. So gross a Misrepresentation at the very entrance, is a warning to every impartial Reader, to let him see, that nothing fair or candid is to be expected from such an Adversary; and that the struggle is not for Truth, but Victory.
Another thing for which his Lp. has my Thanks, is, that he has in several places of his Answer, declared himself a profess'd Enemy to Learning: and makes it a Crime in the Dean, "That he has been pleased to give a privilege to the Errors of the Learned, tho' in truth more inexcusable than the Errors of the Unlearned;" and thinks himself, "That St. Paul would not have had the least regard to such a Qualification, unless as it might aggravate their Crimes, p.157." Which reminds me of what he says, in his Answer to the Committee, p. 98. That "what is called Learning, is so far from being the most necessary, or the most useful Qualification in this case, (of judging in Matters of Religion) that there is nothing which has been seen to administer so many doubts, and so many differences, as that: nor are any, in Experience, seen to be less secure from Error, than Learned Men. For this, look out into the Popish Countries, and see whether one Illiterate Honest Man, be not as capable of judging for himself, in Religion, as all their Learned Men united; even supposing them met together in a General Council, with all possible marks of Solemnity and Grandeur." Had his Lp. added, and with all possible Freedom and Sincerity; it had been a finished Sentence, and every way worthy of its Author. But what makes his Lp. such an Enemy to Learning? Do the Illiterate owe nothing to it? Whence have they the Scriptures laid open to them in the Vulgar Tongue? Does the Reformation, for which his Lp. expresses so much Zeal, owe nothing to Learning? What but the revival of Learning opened the eyes of people to see the Corruptions of the Church of Rome? What but Learning enabled the Reformed to defend the Separation they had made? What but Learning discovered the Impostures, the Forgeries, the lying Wonders, the Innovations in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, the Usurpations and Tyranny of the Papacy? What could justify a Separation, but their being able to assign these causes for it? And what could do that but Learning, great and consummate Learning? These considerations, I should have hoped , would have prevailed with his Lp. to be less severe in his Censures of it. But lastly, I may ask in favour of Learning, does his Lp. owe nothing to it? I am sure some of his Friends at least do; and for their sake, methinks, both Learning and Learned Men might have met with better quarter from him. For my own part, I think my self extremely obliged to his Lp. for so frank a Declaration; and shall always rejoice to have such Adversaries, who at the same time declare themselves Enemies to Learning provided they do it with Sincerity. When that is the case, I shall flatter my self, that I have a good Cause, and our Readers, even the most Unlearned, will be apt to think so too. And it is indeed no small satisfaction to think, that whoever attacks Learning, if he does it weakly, does it no hurt; and if he does it well, his own performance is a good argument against him; while he shews thereby its Usefulness, as well as his own Ingratitude. But I must do his Lp. the justice to acknowledge he is fair in this, that he has not attacked Learning with weapons borrowed from it.
A third thing from which I thank his Lp. is, that he who has so long affected the guise of great Meekness, and of the most Christian Patience, has at last thrown off the Mask, and shewn he can be very angry. Which is the more extraordinary, because it is not only certain, that I had given him as little Provocation as a man could well do, that presumes to differ from him; but that he might from several circumstances have seen reason for a more than usual moderation of his Resentments on this occasion, instead of letting them loose in so extraordinary a manner. For I am persuaded, he does not think I liked the Notions of his Sermon at the first appearance of it, more than I do now; and from thence he might reasonable have imputed my silence for years together to causes that gave me a right to a better treatment. But I do not complain, I am pleased; his Lp. has now quitted the only advantage he had over his Adversaries; that appearance of Humanity and Tenderness, of a patient and forgiving Temper, which has hitherto done him so much service, and has so often moved the pity of his Readers, and made those who could not judge of the merit of the cause, think he had been really injured. His Lp.'s Anger now is open and undisguised, and his words will no longer have more Weight with his Readers than they have Reason in them, which his Anger may take something from, but can add nothing to. This therefore is another thing for which his Lp. has my hearty thanks. I don't love to engage with one who kills with good words, and gives a mortal Wound in the shape of a charitable Prayer. I am glad when an Adversary shews his Resentment. When a man's Anger is his Interpreter, we fear no latent Reserves; and his Words, how pointed soever, will do but little hurt; and others will think it no small sign of an ill cause, whatever he may think himself: especially when it is so unprovok'd, that no body, who is not in the secret, is able to assign a reason for it. For my own part, I am sure no good one can be given, none that is adequate, or in any measure proportioned to it. These several marks and effects of his Lp.'s Displeasure being really all of them so many prejudices in my favour, I accept them as such, and instead of Expostulations and Complaints, make him this humble tender of my Thanks for them.
As to the charge of my favouring the Persecution of innocent but ignorant people, I have already expressed my sense of that matter in the P.S. beforementioned; and have there said, that Negative Discouragements are not included in my notion of Persecution; in which that I am not singular, I might shew from many modern Authorities, and such as were friends to Toleration; not only from single Writers of great note, but from the Concessions in the famous Conference between the two Houses of Parliament upon the Occasional Bill in that last Reign. I might defend the Lawfulness of them even from his Lp. himself, who has made it the great Foundation of his Preservative, that the State has a right to all means for its own Defence; that is, for the Defence of its Constitution, of which the Established Church is as yet a part, and I trust in God, so long as we can preserve the Protestant Succession, always will be. But if the State has a right to all means of Self-defence, then to Negative Discouragements among others. But I will content my self with telling his Lp. what was thought Persecution in the Fourth Century, not by Ecclesiasticks, whom his Lp. may think incompetent Judges in this case, nor by such Emperors as he may perhaps suspect were under the influence of Churchmen: I will give him the Opinion of no less a person than the Emperor Julian, who, had he not been seduced by vain Philosophy from the Christian Faith, was in other respects a most accomplished Prince, for Learning, Virtue, and Humanity; and who thought Persecution merely for Religion so unreasonable, that immediately upon his accession to the Empire he recalled from banishment all that had been exiled by the influence of the Arian Faction under Constantius, and caused Restitution to be made to such whole Goods had been confiscated on that account. Of this we have a very full Declaration in his fifty-second Epistle, where he shews how much more the Christians were obliged to him than to his Predecessor: Synebe gar epi men ekeinou tous pollous auton phygadeuthenai, kai diochthenai, kai desmeuthenai polla de ede kai sphagenai plethe ton legomenon hairetikon.. -- ep'emou de t'ounantion hoi'te gar exhormethentes aphethesan kai hoi demeuthentes apolambanein ta sphetera hapanta nomoi par'hemon elabon.. And in the same Epistle he declares it his opinion, that those who are in Error through Ignorance, rather than Design, should be wrought on by Persuasion and Instruction, not by Force: and therefore most earnestly recommends it to those of his own Religion not to injure, or assault, or offer any violence to the Christians, either to their Persons or Houses. Logoi peithesthai chre, kai didaskesthai tous anthropous, ou plegais, oude hybresin, oude aikismoi tou somatos. authis te kai pollakis paraino tois epi ten alethe theosebeian hormomenois meden adikein ton Galilaion ta plethe, mede epitithesthai, mede hybrizein eis autous: eleein de chre mallon e misein tous epi tois megistois prattontas kakos. To the same purpose he expresses himself very fully in other places, particularly in his forty-third Epistle, which begins thus: Ego men kekrika tois Galilaiois hapasin houto praos kai philanthropos [chresthai] hoste medena medamou bian hypomenein, mede eis hieron helkesthai med'eis allo ti toiouton epereazesthai para ten oikeian prothesin. And the last words of the preceding Epistle are, speaking of the Christians, kai gar, oimai, didaskein, all'ouchi kolazein chre tous anoetous.
Thus averse was Julian to all Force in matters of Religion, and to every thing that is in common language underflood by Persecution. But did he think it was inconsistent with Justice, or his Humanity, not to employ them in his Government, and bestow favours on them? By no means. He thought there was a great deal of difference between not persecuting, and not favouring. Hear him in his seventh Epistle. Ego ne tous theous oute kteinesthai tous Galilaious, oute typtesthai para to dikaion, out' allo ti paschein kakon boulomai, protimasthai men toi tous theosebeis kai pany phemi dein. The Christians he would not have killed, or beat, or any way injured; but those of his own Religion he thinks should have the preference, and the favours of his Government. This was the sense of Julian, and I have never heard of any wise, or indeed of any weak Government, before or since his time, who thought that those who dissent from the Publick Religion had a Right, a natural inherent Right, to Places and Favours. And I am persuaded, all Government will ever be of the same mind, that it is within their own breast to determine, how far, and under what limitaions, to indulge those who dissent from the Established Worship; and that they will not by the novel Schemes of private Writers ever suffer this invaluable Prerogative to be wrested from them.
It has indeed been argued in a late Sermon, That the Civil Magistrate has nothing to do in matters of Religion, and that Absolute Liberty in all such is every man's just Right; but with what success? No Law of God in the Old Testament, no Precept of our Saviour or his Apostles in the New, can be produced to justify this notion; no Precedent or Example for it can be found in Scripture, either with respect to Jewish, or any other Govenors; no instance can be brought from any History to support this conceit either before or since our Saviour's time, though we look as far back as the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Persians: Let us search to the ends of the Earth, from Pole to Pole, from the Rising to the Setting of the Sun, through all the Revolutions and Ages of the World, we shall not find any one Civilized Government weak enough to give up so valuable Right. On the contrary, though by some modern Schemists Governments as well as Worlds can be framed without a God, all wise Governors have ever founded their Government in Religion; and as they looked on themselves as God's Vicegerents, have thought it their Duty to take care of his Honour in the first place; this indeed they thought not only their Duty, but their Interest; that the Stability of their Government depended on the Piety of their People, and that their Laws had their greatest froce from whence themselves derived their Power, from God; and therefore Religion had always the first place in their Laws, both on account of its own Dignity, and for the Influence it would naturally diffuse thro' them. No instance is brought to the older side, but of one Gallio, an inferior Governor of a Province in the Reign of Claudius; tho' the Sermon indeed would make one think it was in the Reign of Augustus. For in explication of his Text, the Preacher tells us, Gallio was the Roman Prefect of Achaia, a Consular Province under Augustus: and so says Grotius upon the place. But Grotius does not stop there; what he says, is, that in the Division of Provinces between the Senate and the Emperor, made by Augustus, Achaia fell to the Senate's lot, and was a Proconsular Province: But Provinces did not continue always according to that Division; for Augustus made some changes himself; and this Province of Achaia, Grotius observes, was by the very next Emperor made an Imperial one. But what Tiberius did, Claudius undid, and restored it to the Senate. I observe this only to shew how little this Preacher attended to what was before him, who could not have fallen in such a mistake but through great Carelessness and Inattention.
But let us see what this instance of Gallio amounts to. The case, as represented in the Acts, Chap. xviii.12 -- 18. is this: The Jews seized St. Paul in a tumultuous manner, and brought him before Gallio, for teaching Doctrines contrary to their Law. Gallio, when he saw what the matter was, would not meddle with it, but drove them all away [apelase] from the Judgement-Seat, or out of Court. Upon this the Greeks (those of Gallio's Religion) took the Chief Ruler of the Jewish Synagogue, and beat him before Gallio's face; but Gallio, says the Text, car'd for none of these things. I can't see any reason why Gallio's example should be of any authority for other Governors; but if it ought, why do we pick and choose? Let us take the whole of it; and then there is an admirable pattern for Magistrates; they ought not only not to take upon them to judge in Religious matters, but to suffer Assaults to be made, and the Peace broken with impunity in open Court, and before their face. I would gladly know why one Preacher may not recommend to Magistrates the latter part of this Example, as well as another has done the first. But his Example, even in the first part of it, upon consideration will be found to be nothing to the purpose. The Preacher indeed says, that the Crime laid against St. Paul was Blasphemy against the Religion Established by Law, Which Gallio declared did not fall under his Cognizance. Upon which I can't but observe, first, that Blasphemy was not laid to his charge; and secondly, that Gallio does not declare that the case did not belong to his cognizance; but that he would not meddle with it: Krites gar ego touton ou boulomai einai. I will not be a Judge of these things; not because they were Religious, not Civil matters, as is pretended in the next page; but either because Gallio despised them, looked on them as trifles about which he would not concern himself; or because the Jewish Law was no Rule to him, he was no way concerned to inforce the observance of it. But thirdly, what is most extraordinary in this sentence is, the unfair insinuation there is in saying, that St. Paul's Crime was his opposing the Religion Established by the Law. Had it been said their Law, it would then presently have appeared, that what Gallio did in this case was nothing to the Preacher's purpose; but as the words are, Established by the Law, I doubt it led his Hearers, as well as his unlearned Readers, to believe, that the case of St. Paul brought before Gallio is parallel to that of a man who should now be brought before the Civil Magistrate for opposing the Religion Established by Law in this, or any other Christian Country; and that from this instance they are to learn their Duty, and to declare to all the world, that such cases do not belong to their Cognizance.
But with great submission, I conceive nothing can be wider from the point 'tis aimed at, than this instance is from the application it is drawn to. For in the first place Gallio was but an Inferior Magistrate, and was to govern according to Law; and if St. Paul had broken none of the Laws in force in that Province, Gallio could have nothing to say to him; otherwise he might have entred into the charge against him, had he so pleased, as well as Felix, or Festus, or other Roman Governors did in Judaea, where, after it was reduced into a Roman Province, the Jewish Laws, under certain restrictions, were permitted by the Emperors to remain in force. Nothing therefore from Gallio's example can be concluded to affect other Governors; much less can it be inferred from the instance of an Inferior Magistrate, that the Emperor, or any other Supreme Power could not justly make Laws about Religious Matters, for the direction of Judges and Magistrates, when such cases should come before them. Nor is there any thing in fact more certain, than that the Roman, as well as other Governments, did think the affairs of Religion were within their Cognizance, and did from time to time make such Laws about them, as they judged proper. In the next place 'tis evident St. Paul is not accused of acting in violation of what was the Established Religion by the Roman Law; but of acting against a Religion that was not Established, against that of the Jews, about which the Romans troubled not themselves. Had it been otherwise, had St. Paul been accused of Blasphemy against the National Religion, I believe Gallio, as indolent as he seems to have been, would have acted another part; and would have been obnoxious to the Laws, and false to his Trust, if he had not. In truth the case is much the same, as it would be, if the Jews settled here, upon a Schism breaking out among them should prosecute any member of their Synagogue in Westminster-Hall; where the Judge might dismiss the Cause, as Gallio did, without any prejudice to his Authority, or breach of his Duty, in what regards the Established Religion. The Prosecutor is concerned in the defence of the Religion Established by the Law; and so likewise is the Judge for the Religion Established by the Law. But are they the same Religions, or are the fame Laws meant in both Expressions? No; they are as wide as can be; as different as Christianity and Judaism; and no body, with any Truth or Sincerity could call the Religion established by the Jewish Law, the Religion established by Law. But such shifts are men driven to, so shamefully do they pervert Scripture, when they set up for new Schemes in Religion, that have no foundation either in the Laws of Nations, or the Law of God.
I might go on, and shew the same Unfairness and weak reasoning thro' almost every Paragraph of this Sermon, in which there is so much Assurance, and so little Argument, that upon these accounts, as well as its Insult on the Establishment, it is, I think, without a parallel. Its grand Principle is, that the Civil Magistrate can of right punish nothing, but as it prejudices mens Civil Interests; and virtue of this, common Swearing, Blasphemy, Incest, and other the most detestable Crimes have a right to Impunity; and that for this weighty reason, because Secret Intentions of Wickedness, and Treasonable Thoughts, and the like, are not liable to Civil Punishments. That is, the Magistrate can't punish what he can't come to the knowledge of: But does it follow, he may not punish where he can? Curse not the King, no not in thy thought (says Solomon;) for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter. But others having professedly written against the Notions advanced in this Sermon; I shall enter no farther into the consideration of it, presuming (for I have not yet seen the Answers to it) that they have not only anticipated all I could think neccessary to be observed of it, but have very probably said a great deal more. Nor should I have taken even this notice of it, but for the relation it has to the Dispute between the Bp. of B. and me; for the Sermon owns in plain terms, and at large, what the Bp. was by everybody supposed to mean, but what he himself would not acknowledge he had said. This made it proper for me just to take notice of a Discourse that has made so much Noise, and given so just Offence. But I say no more, having no desire to expose the Author, but the Argument: nor would I have said thus much in this place, but that the following Papers were drawn up while I was at Worcester, long before I had seen this Sermon; and I was not willing to be at the trouble of making an Alteration in them, having so little inclination to this barren Controversy, that they have lain by me four Months untouch'd.
I shall therefore take leave of this Sermon, with observing, that were the example of Gallio ever so pertinent to what 'tis alledged for, yet it would not prove that the Magistrate has not a right to favour one Religion above another, tho' he will not be a Judge in Religious Controversies; or that the Legislature may not establish as the Publick Religion, that they think the best, and confine to the Profession of it all Places of Power and Trust for its greater Defence and Security against the restless Spirit of Enthusiasm, and the cunning of those who know how to make the madness of a deluded people subservient to their own ends. Gallio might prefer, and indeed could not but prefer those of the Established Religion to all places in his Government, exclusive either of Jews or Christians, as their Constitution then stood. But if even this could be concluded from Gallio's example, that negative discouragements might not be used in preference of one Religion before another, purely as such, yet Religious and Civil Affairs are so inseparably interwoven and blended together, and Religion is so often made a pretence to disturb the State, that the care of it necessarily comes within the Sphere of the Civil Power purely as such; since 'tis impossible to preserve the peace and quiet of the State, if the Magistrate renounces all right to meddle in matters of Religion. But if the Magistrate has such a right, 'tis of little importance to enquire, on what foot he has it; whether directly, as it is a matter of Religion; or indirectly, as it affects the welfare of the State Civil. Which ever way it be, if he has such a right, he has it; and whoever takes it from him, is injurious both to God and his Vicegerent; he prostitutes the honour of God, and weakens the hands of the Government. 'Tis pretended indeed, That God has infinite ways of maintaining and taking care of his own Honour, without being beholden to the Secular Arm. And has he not as many ways of maintaining the peace of Society? but sure it would be a strange inference, to conclude from thence, that there is no occasion for any Civil Government. And 'tis just as strange, to infer from the same premisses, that there is no occasion for the Magistrate's doing any thing to maintain the Honour of God, and the Obedience due to him. Government is the great instrument of Providence in all the aggairs of this world; and it will be always true, that God ordinarily works by the stated means of second Causes, tho' he has infinite ways of acting without them, if he please; for who can set bounds to a Power we acknowledge to be infinite? Such a way of arguing appears to me so trifling and ludicrous, or rather so prophane, that I should think it so intended, did I not know the Author, who, I verily believe, was far from any such design. As to the Government, that the denying it this right is weakening the hands of it, is so manifest, that no principle in Mathematicks is more certain, or more evident. I wish we had not so sure a proof of it, as we have from the effect the barely advancing this novel Notion in so publick a manner, has already had, by the inflaming Mens minds, and increasing that disaffection, in which the Enemies of the Government place their chief hopes.
But to return to Julian, it will be asked, Was not he a Persecutor of the Christians? I answer, No otherwise than by pursuing such methods as the Bp. thinks most for the good of their Religion: which were chiefly these three. First, he withdrew from them the revenues and favours, immunities, privileges and rights which his Predecessors had granted to them; by which they were reduced to their primitive State, that happy and perfect State which the Bp. seems to be so extremely fond of; and that for the same reason that Julian gave, that they might be less incumbred in their Journey to the Kingdom of Heaven, hina penomenoi, sophronosi kai me sterethosin, hes eti elpizousin, ouraniou basileias. A second way he took to weaken them, was to keep them ignorant, by help of a pretty dilemma, that all Teachers should act conscientiously and sincerely, and should not teach what they did not think right, and true, and good. Those therefore that did not like the Religion and Gods of Homer, Hersiod, Demosthenes, Herodotus, Thucydides, Isocrates, etc. should not teach such Books; or if they will teach their Books, they should profess their Religion. And by this Argument the Children of Christians were ordered to be sent where they should be taught nothing but Matthew and Luke, and what others of the same Religion had writ. And this, I conceive, does not differ much from his Lp.'s notions, who seems to think it an advantage to be Illiterate; at least so far as the belief and practice of Religion, as taught in the Scriptures, are concerned. A third way Julian took to weaken the Christian Cause, was not only not to persecute, but to indulge an absolute and universal liberty to all Sects of them: what his Lp. thinks the most proper course to preserve Religion, Julian thought the most effectual way to ruin it. The remark of Ammianus Marcellinus on this occasion, a very judicious Writer, and a great admirer of Julian, is so very remarkable, that I can't forbear transcribing it: Ut dispositorum roboraret effectum, dissidentes Christianorum Antistites cum plebe discissa in palatium intromissos monebat, ut civilibus discordiis consopitis quisque nullo vetante religioni suae serviret intrepidus. Quod agebat ideo obstinate, ut dissensiones augente licentia non timeret unanimantem postea plebem: nullas infestas hominibus bestias, ut sunt sibi ferales plerique Christianorum, expertus. Lib. 22. c.5. The best Christian Writers have expressed their sense of his Indulgence to the same effect, Eo modo putans (to use the words of St. Augustin, cited by Valesius on the place) Christianum nomen posse perire de terris, si unitati Eccelesiae da qua lapsus fuerat, invideret, & sacrilegas dissensiones liberas esse permitteret. In these ways was Julian a Persecutor of the Church, little differing from those the Bp. thinks most proper for its defence.
But to proceed; in the next place, his Lp. takes notice of what I had said relating to Establishments: and the sum of his Remarks is, 1. That he does not know certainly what I mean by an Establishment. 2. That if I mean by Establishments, any thing consistent with the Common Right of Mankind to judge for themselves, as well as to enjoy the priviliges of humane Society, and with the Liberty with which Christ himself has made us free, he has said nothing that can be construed against them; but, 3. That he can't join with me in supporting Establishments by such arguments as I have used. Now to put his Lp. out of his doubts as to the first, I mean by Establishments, such as the world has always meant by them, such as that is we enjoy in this Nation, as to its nature and kind, tho' not as to every particular circumstance and part of it. As to the second, I can't but be very much surprised, to find his Lp. saying, that he has said nothing against Establishments under certain restrictions; for I think I have read large Books of his, that are from beginning to end against all Establishments; if by Establishment be meant the encouraging and giving by Laws a preference to one Religion above another. For the encouraging of one is necessarily the discouragement of another, and consequently is applying humane and worldly Engines to matters not of this world, and tends to promote Hypocrify, and to destroy Sincerity, which his Lp. has made to be all in all. Which principles tend to destroy all the Establishments I have ever heard of, except that may deserve the name of one, that I have lately met with in the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina, said to be writ by Mr. Lock, and published in a Collection of Pieces under his name; but which I suppose he only drew up into form as the sense of the Lord Shaftsbury, rather than his own; the care of the Affair having by the Duke of Albemarle, and other Proprietors been recommended to that Lord, to whom Mr. Lock was Secretary. But however that be, Mr. Lock was then but young, about thirty, and had not that knowledge of humane Nature, he aquired in his riper years, nor had turned his thoughts to so serious and thorough a consideration of the Christian Institution, as his Writings shew he did for many years before his death. In these Constitutions, to gain the affections of the Natives, and encourage others to come and settle in this Country, 'tis ordained, That any seven persons agreeing in any Religion, shall constitute a Church. And to such a Church no profession of any part of the Christian Faith is made necessary; only to acknowledge the Being of a God, and that he is publickly to be worshipped. So that any Man who could seduce six more, (and he has ill luck, who in a populous Country cannot,) might set up a Church, in which may be professed any, or all the Heresies and Superstitions that ever were, or can be invented: none are excluded from this privilege but downright Atheists, such as the impious Author of the Pantheisticon (This Atheistick Writer not content with what he has dared to print in his prophane Piece, has, I am told, in some Copies inserted a prayer in MS. in these or the like words: Omnipotens & Sempiterne Bacche, qui hominum corda donis tuis recreas, concede propitius, ut qui hesternis poculis aegroti facti sunt, hodiernis curentur, & 
 per pocula poculorum. How to fill the blank I have left, I do not remember. Thus prays this Pantheist, whose impudent Blasphemies loudly call for the Animadversions of the Civil Power.), and a few such Infidels, who are either too stupid to understand an Argument, or too thoughtless to attend to one, or too vicious to give a practical assent. 
There is indeed provision made by one of these Constitutions, as the Country comes to be sufficiently planted, for the building of Churches, and the publick maintenance of Divines, to be employed in the exercise of Religion, according to the Church of England. But this Article the Editor observes, was inserted afterwards, by some of the chief of the Proprietors, against Mr. Lock's judgment: and indeed the series of the constitutions shews as much, that this was not originally a part of them. Till I saw these Constitutions, I could not imagine what sort of Establishments it was his Lp. could, upon his Principles, allow; but this has cleared up my doubts, and I shall suppose this is in the main what he would have, till I am better informed. As for his Lp.'s Limitations, if he does not include in the Establishments he allows, that of our own Church, he does then in effect declare, that it is inconsistent with the Common Rights of Mankind, and the Privileges of human Society, and with Christian Liberty: a heavy charge! but which has been so often and so fully answered, that I think it needless to say more here. I will only add, I know no common Rights of Men in Society, but legal Rights, and the Laws are the rule and measure of them, and all Nations have thought religious Establishments consistent with them. And as to Christian Liberty, I desire his Lp. would define it first, and settle the true Gospel notion of it, and then I dare say that he will never more object that to us.
But in the last place, if his Lp. and I were agreed upon an Establishment, he could not do it upon my reasons; first because they turn the eyes of Christians from the conduct of Almighty God in the Christian Religion, which was (I suppose his Lp. means, is) not of this world, to what it pleased him to ordain in the Jewish, which was of this world. What a pretty Antithesis is here? who can stand out against the convincing force of it? was of this world -- was not of this world! Thus sounds persuade as well as sense. But strip the Argument of this jingle, and it is this: The Jews being one People, God did not only give them a System of Religion, but likewise a Form of Government; which Government had the cognizance of all matters, whether Civil or Religious, under the direction of such Laws as he thought fit to give to them; so that they were a sort of Theocracy. But with respect to the Christian Religion, that being not to be confined to one People, but to be propagated to all Nations in which Governments were already settled, he sent his Son, not to make any alterations in them, much less to pull down one and set up another, but to promote only the religious Interests of Mankind, to call them to repentance by preaching the doctrines of the Gospel, and to do what was necessary on God's part, for their Redemption. And in virtue of this Mission, Christ, by his Apostles, gathered to himself, out of all Nations, a People zealous of good works: but with respect to the Governments in the several Nations, his Gospel left all things in the state it found them. So that they who embraced the Faith of Christ, neither were by any appointment from him, nor for a while in the nature of things could be under any other direction, as Christians, but that of his Apostles, and those who laboured with them in the Ministry, or were appointed to succeed them in it, acting in his name, and under such rules as the Gospel has prescribed to them. This now being the case, does it from hence follow, by any good consequence, that when whole Nations shall be converted to the Faith, when Kings and Emperors are become Christian, that they may not for the establishing of this Religion, look to the conduct of God in his Government of the Jews? or that they may not imitate the examples of those good and religious Princes, who in virtue of God's Laws used all their power and authority to procure obedience to that Worship and Religion he had instituted? is the conduct of God contrary to, and inconsistent with the self? can he do what is unrighteous or unreasonable; what is malum in se? was his conduct no where fit to be imitated out of one little corner of the world? is an Establishment more inconsistent with Sincerity and true Religion now, than it was then? or, was there no Sincerity and true Religion among the Jews? is it not as reasonable that a Christian Prince should study the Law of Christ, as it was for a Jewish one to study that of Moses? or does his Lp. think, that the Prince was commanded to study it as a private Man only, and not in his princely Capacity, as he was to make it the measure of his Government? was it commendable, and for the eternal honour of David, Hezekiah and Josiah, to be zealous for the honour of God, and in defense of his Religion; and shall it be absurd, and criminal, and impious, for Christian Princes to shew the like zeal, and take the same care? Whatever his Lp. may think, the Christian World has always been of another mind. The conduct of God in his Instituion of the Jewish Government, can't but be a proper Subject for all Governemnts to consider well, and in many cases to form themselves upon: and to say otherwise, is to have less regard to God, than is usually paid to any wise Law-maker among mere Men. But farther, was the conduct of God in instituting the Religion he ordained by Moses, any other than the conduct of the same God, in the Covenant he made with Abraham? did he not appoint Circumcision under the like Sanctions? did he not expect the Covenant he had made with him, should be punctually observed, both by himself, and by his Children and Servants, by all either born in his house, or bought with his money, all persons without exception, under his Authority and Government? I know him, says God, Gen. xviii.19. that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him. Did God require this of Abraham the Father of the faithful, as Father of his Family, and did he not expect the same of all Fathers of Families among Christians? Or is it possible he should expect less of Princes, than of them? Shall Parents and Masters be obliged to use their Authority to promote the belief and practice of true Religion in their Families? And shall Princes be so far from being under any obligation to use the Authority with which God has invested them, in the same manner and to the same good ends, that to attempt it shall be a Crime in them? Shall it be interpreted to be an abuse of their Authority? Shall they be told, is it turning their eyes from God -- to God; from God now well informed in the nature of Religion, to God, while as yet he was not? For the objection in effect comes to this, or there is no sense in it. As to the Antithesis, was of this world, and was not of this world; 'tis is of the Jewish and Christian Religion equally true, that neither of them were of this world; they were both of them from Above, and came down from Heaven. Nor was the Jewish to be propagated by Rebellion and the force of Arms, any more than the Christian. For as to the Extirpation of the Seven Nations, that was in virtue of a particular Command, and grounded upon particular Reasons. But as this expression not of this world, is applied by his Lp. to the Christian Religion, and vast consequences are made to hang upon it; I have in the following papers fully shewn what is meant by the Kingdom, that is not of this world; and therefore shall content my self to refer the Reader thither, where he will find, that when 'tis rightly understood, that can have no place in this Argument.
The second Objection his Lp. makes, for not agreeing to my Reasons, is, that they reflect shame upon Protestantism, and the Church of England it self, by making all its security to consist in Human Laws, as having no lasting force against Popery, but from these. Here his Lp. puts upon me the fallacy he often puts upon himself, by which one thing is made every thing; I say, our Legal Establishment is the great Support of the Protestant Religion, his Lp. makes me say 'tis all its support; that all its security consists in Human Laws. Though one thing may be the great support of it, surely several other things may be also necessary to the same end. We have a good Cause, and we may hope for a Blessing on it from the Providence of God: but how? not by Miracles, but in the ordinary way, upon our endeavours in its defence. 'Tis the Goodness of God that has raised up Learned Men to write in its defence; and 'tis the same Providence that has turned the hearts of our Kings, and given our Senators wisdom to support the profession of his Truth by wise and good Laws. And therefore I must take leave still to be of opinion, "That the Protestant Religion, unless it had the gift of Miracles, could no more defend it self without an Establishment against the united Strength and Zeal of Popery, than a disconcerted Rabble could stand against a well disciplined Army." Julian, who was no fool, I have already observed, thought he could not ruin Christanity more effectually than by an unlimited Toleration of all Sects, without the Establishment of any; and had God suffered him to reign any length of time, who can doubt but he would have obtained his end, unless the gift of Miracles had been revived? For when Christians had been without Power, and without Union, and by infinite Factions and Divisions crumbled into nothing, who can think it possible for a Religion, however good, to subsist in such miserable circumstances against the Learning, and Power, and exasperated Zeal of Paganism, under a Prince whose Virtue was an Ornament to his Religion? Who forced no body, but by his favours invited all he thought worth it, and reformed his Religion both by the Spirituality of the new Platonism, and by transcribing into it what he saw most excellent in the practical part of the Christian Institution? But not to insist longer on this case, what does his Lp. think of the state of the Protestant Religion in the Empire? How long would it subsist, if the Westphalian Treaty were abolished? Who sees not, how it labours to subsist notwithstanding the Protection it has from it, and that so many Powerful Princes are watchful in defence of it? Who sees not how it loses ground, and what Dangers daily threaten it? If the Goodness of a Cause could preserve it without human help, how came Mahometanism to triumph as it does over Christianity in so great part of the world? What is become of the once so flourishing Churches of Asia, Syria, Egypt, and Africa? Let his Lp. reconsider these cases, and then tell us, an Establishment is not necessary to preserve the Protestant Religion against Popery; whose Learning, and Power, and Zeal are always implacably bent upon its Extirpation. For I believe his Lp. is not so sanguine as to think, that, if the Protestants of this Nation should be in the humour of making the experiment, and come into this scheme, that the Popish Countries would follow this example.
His Lp.'s third Objection against my Reasons for Establishments is, That they make him suspect I mean by Establishments at least moderate Persecution of the Unlearned and Ignorant. To this, if it be needful to say more, let me ask his Lp. these two questions, First, Whether in his opinion the main Body of the Members of the Church of England are more for the Persecution of Dissenters than he thinks I am, or less? If more (and I am persuaded he is of that mind) then I would ask in the second place, Which is the likeliest way to bring the minds of people off from such a Spirit, and induce them to be easy and pleased with a reasonable Indulgence to tender Consciences? To run directly counter to them, and shew your self as contrary to their sentiments as possible, or to make some advances, and meet them half way? That is, are people who are the Majority to be driven, or led? To be gained by a rigid and absolute Opposition to them, or by Softness and making some Consessions, and treating the notions of those you would convince, as if they had indeed some reason in them, but were pushed too far? Are people ever like to meet and be reconciled, while both sides affect to be in the extremes; or by mutually receding from them, and approaching to a Medium? I know his Lp. will be against me, by the part he has taken in his Preservative, which I fear never did, nor will ever make one Convert to the Government, however he may have pleased some who never were its Enemies. But most men, I doubt not, will be of another mind, and allow, that the likeliest way to convince people, and overcome their prejudices, is not to keep at the greatest distance from them, and affect an unnecessary Opposition to their Principles or Notions, but to shew a disposition to come to some temper, and make what approaches you can towards them.
This consideration might have made his Lp. less severe upon what he calls moderate Persecution. But I lay no claim to it. Dissensions in Religion, when under no restraint from Laws, are oftentimes of infinite ill consequence. The Spirit of Superstition and Enthusiasm is naturally turbulent, and Sedition frequently lurks under the cover of them; and therefore I am not ashamed to own my self of opinion, that severe Laws to curb and check the first beginnings of Disorders from them, are not only lawful, but often necessary; every Government has a right to make, execute, suspend, abrogate, and renew such Laws, when and as often as they think fit. The Laws of this kind that are, or ever were in force of this Nation, were non of them designed to put any hardships upon truly tender Consciences, but were all of them extorted from the Government, which is naturally mild and extremely tender of the people's Rights, in defence of the Constitution, against the Factious and Seditious Attempts, Conspiracies, and Rebellions that were carried on under the specious name of Conscience; and were intended to prevent offences of that nature, rather than to punish them; much less to aggrieve honest well meaning people so long as no danger is apprehended from the party they are of. 'Tis plainly for this reason, that very severe Laws are still in force against Papists, though no one feels the rigour of them while he lives quiet, and gives no offence. This the Legislature has judged necessary, from the experience it has had of the implacable and restless Spirit of that Religion, which obliges its votaries upon Principle to be Enemies to our Constitution, and dispenses with all the ties of Faith and Honour, by which they can pledge their Duty and Allegiance, so that they can't give sufficient security for their acting like good Subjects, if they would: this has made it necessary to keep them always under the restraint of severe Laws. Other Dissenters are not such sworn Enemies of our Constitution; they are not listed under any Foreign Head, they have no Doctrines that can dispense with Solemn Oaths, much less are they taught, that there is any merit in breaking the Faith once given to the Government: The Government therefore has proportioned the making or executing severe Laws with regard to them, according to the temper and behaviour of them from time to time. At present there being no reason to question their affection to the Government, all Laws of that kind have been suspended, or repealed, and will, no doubt, continue so, till another behaviour calls for another treatment. If ever this rule has not been observed, and any sort of Dissenters have been treated with an unreasonable severity, that is not chargeable on the Church of England, but on Popish measures, which were secretly contriving both their and our destruction, as is now to every body well known. The Establishment it self stands clear of every thing that can with justice be brought under the odious name of Persecution.
I can't forbear upon this subject of Establishments, taking notice of a passage of Mr. Chillingworth in his second Sermon: where speaking of our Reformation, "The whole doctrine, says he, of Christian Faith, is restored to the Primitive Lustre and Integrity; nay more (which is a greater happiness than God ever created [granted] to those his chosen servants which lived in the infancy of the Church) the profession of a pure unspotted Religion is so far from being dangerous, or infamous, that we have the sword of the Civil Magistrate, the power and enforcement of the Laws and Statutes, to maintain this our precious Faith without stain and undefiled against all Heretical and Schismatical Oppugners thereof." I had once intended to have supported many things in hte following papers by passages of this Writer, but they swelled so much beyond what I designed, that I was forced to lay that thought aside; which I at first took up, not because I think him the best Defender of the Reformation, but because some other persons have expressed so great a veneration for him, from whom, were he alive, I am persuaded by many places in his writings, he would shew himself to differ extremely; and particularly from this in his seventh Sermon, where "he declares he dare not take upon him so much to gratify the Papists, as to lay this for a ground of stating Controversies between us and the Church of Rome, That that is be acknowledged for the doctrine of these Reformed Churches, which is most opposite and contradictory to the Church of Rome." Whether some of his greatest Admirers do not come under this censure; nay, whether, what is much worse, they do not first misrepresent Popery, and then make it a certain mark of being in the right, to expose what they think the contrary, I leave the Reader to judge. As to Mr. Chillingworth, he is confessedly an excellent Writer; but it may, I think, with great truth be said, that he was much abler at pulling down than building up; towards which little can be expected of a man who is by his own arguments pushed so home in the defence he would make of Protestantism, that he has nothing left, but to cry out the BIBLE. The Bible, I say, the Bible is the Religion of Protestants; and so say all the Hereticks and Schismaticks that ever were. Agreeably to which principle Mr. Chillingworth in another place (No. 23. of his Preface) expresses himself thus: "We do not renounce your Communion totally and absolutely, but only leave communicating with you in the practice and profession of your Errors." Then follows, "The trial whereof will be to propose some form of worshipping God, taken wholly out of Scripture; and herein, if we refuse to join with you, you may justly say, we have utterly and absolutely abandoned your Communion." Upon which passage A. Bp. Bramhal very judiciously observes in his Vindication of Grotius, &c. p. 637. "That this might serve for a Coverfew to hide the flame of our Contentions from breaking out whilst we are at our Devotions; but it hath nothing of Reconciliation in it, and hath as little probability of a Pacification. -- By being taken wholly out of Scripture, either it is intended, that it shall be all in the Words and Phrase of Scripture; that will weigh little, (I have never observed any thing more repugnant to the true sense of Scripture, than some things which have been expressed altogether in the Phrase of Scripture) or it is intended, that the matter of Liturgy shall be taken wholly out of Scripture; but this hath so little of an expedient in it, that it will leave the Controversy where it is. Both parties do already contend, that their respective Forms are taken out of the Scriptures."
Thus far this very Learned and Judicious Writer, who, I hope may say without offence, has defended the Reformation with a masterly skill, with a thourough knowledge of every part of the Argument, and in perfect consistency with our own Establishment. This Author has in the same Chapter considered several other passages of Mr. Chillingworth upon the same point (the reconciling our Religious Differences) in answer to Mr. Baxter, of whom I can't but observe he says, He has his fears and jealousies that he will never prove a good Architect in this kind (of proposing ways of Reconciliation) because he never found any man yet who was given to innovation, but his Genius was ten times apter for pulling down than for building up. But this is said of Mr. Baxter, not of Mr. Chillingworth, who is certainly a very good Reasoner, and may be read with much advantage: but I fear the reading of him by Young Divines has had one great inconvenience; they see little shew of Reading in him, and from thence are induced to think, there is no necessity of Learning to make a good Divine; nay, that if he had been more a Scholar, he had been a worse Reasoner; and therefore not to study the antient Writers of the Church is one step to the being Chillingworths themselves. I fear, I say, the reading Mr. Chillingworth in their first years has had this influence, to make them think, the good Parts and good Sense would do without Learning, and that Learning is rather a prejudice than an improvement of them. But 'tis a great mistake to judge of a man's Learning by the shew that is made of it: Mr. Chillingworth had studied hard, and digested well what he read, and so must they who hope to write as well, and be as much esteemed. It will be always true and good advice, that A. Bp. Bramhall says in the place before mentioned,  Dr. Ward (Then Master of Sidn. and Marg. Professor.) gave him, when he was a young Student in Theology; when he told him, that it was impossible that the present Controversies of the Church should be rightly determined or reconciled, without a deep insight into the doctrine of the Primitive Fathers, and a competent skill in School Theology. The former affords a right pattern, and the second smootheth it over, and plaineth away the knots. The opinion of two such good Judges may, I hope, be of some weight, to check that contempt of Learning, which is become so fashionable; not from a prevalence of good Sense above our Predecessors, but from a want of their diligence; and to convince young Students, that tho' good Sense and a knowledge of the World may make a Man; 'tis Learning, and the knowledge of what is in Books, that must make a Divine.
Nothing remains in his Lp.'s Preface, that calls for any answer. For as to what he says of Mr. Rogers his discourse of the Visible and Invisible Church, the ingenious Author is very able to speak for himself; and the same Temper, Learning and good Sense, that have appeared in that Piece, shew themselves, I doubt not, in his Review; which for some reasons I shall deny my self the pleasure of reading, till I have finished my own Papers. In which I hope there is nothing wants much excuse, as to the manner of it, or that is very unbecoming one, who professes to have no other difference with his Lp. but what arises from his ill treatment of the Clergy of all Churches in general, and of the Constitution of our own Church in particular. So long as he is in that Spirit, as a Clergyman and a Member of the Church of England, I must always differ from him. But whenever his Lp. takes another part, when he shall think fit to treat the Clergy with candor, decency or common justice, and shew himself a friend to the Church of England, to which he is obliged by the most sacred ties, I shall be among the first to pay his Lp. all the respect due to his superior Merit, and to wish he may long adorn the Station he is in.
March 15, 1720-21.


