A DISCOVERIE For Division or Setting out of Land, as to the best Form.
Published by Samuel Hartlib  Esquire, for Direction and more Advantage and Profit of the Adventurers and Planters in the FENS  and other Waste and undisposed Places in England and IRELAND.
Whereunto are added some other Choice Secrets or Experiments of Husbandry.
With a Philosophical Quere concerning the Cause of Fruitfulness.
AND An Essay to shew How all Lands may be improved in a New Way to become the ground of the increase of Trading and Revenue to this Common-wealth.
------
LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden-hall-street, 1653.

A DISCOVERY For New DIVISIONS, OR, Setting out of LANDS, as to the best Forme: Imparted in a Letter to Samuel Hartlib, Esquire.
HONOURED SIR, 
I Here present you with a plain Discovery of that prudentiall Contrivance for the more advantageous setting out of Lands, which I have formerly acquainted you with, and as you know offered in vain to some of the Company of Drayners of the great Fen, as I had opportunity; That so I may not onely gratifie your Publique-heartednesse and great Zeal for the Common good, and testifie my willingnesse to be doing some good in my generation, as God shall enable me, but that I may in some sort be blamelesse to all Posterity, though those Lands be not well divided or sub-divided, since I have not onely offered my assistance, such as it is in private, but do here (and suppose not altogether too late) freely offer it to the consideration of all men that are, or may be concerned in the same, or the like nature, of what better use Lands divided, or subdivided, according to the Plats here intended to every mans view may be found or esteemed. And lest any mistake should be in the not rightly understanding my meaning, or the nature of the thing, give me leave to trouble the World with a few of my Reasons for, or apprehensions of that Advantage or Conveniency, which may be more had and obtained by following this Example.
I have been called to a more then ordinary use of, and love to all sorts of Husbandry, and particularly to Agriculture, wherein God hath been graciously pleased to recompence my Zeal, and indeavour with an increase of knowledge and experience in the wayes of managing Agriculture and Husbandry; in all its parts; and that not onely according to what is commonly known and practised, but by some Additionals, which if well accepted, and rightly pursued would tend exceedingly to the prosperity, honour and plenty of this whole Nation; but of this, as I have formerly acquainted you more largely (for you have thought fit to hint it to the World in your Reformed Husbandman) I shall therefore proceed and say, that that dear and even nationall affection which I have to Husbandry, above all other employments among men, may (perhaps) have occasioned my further enquiry into these affairs; and by those observations to which I have given my selfe more then every man, I may have attained to farther in sight then every man hath troubled himself to take, which I freely present to my Native Countrey, at least so much as concerns the matter here in Question; namely, The setting out of Land, as to the best Forme.
I have observed that all or most part of the Lands, Lordships, Mannors, Parishes, Farmes, and particular Grounds, or Closes in England are not (or rather were not at that time past, when they were first) set out in any good Forme; too much of England being left as waste ground in Commons, Mores, Heaths, Fens, Marishes, and the like, which are all Waste Ground; but some more, some lesse; some being made a little better use of then others; but all capable of very great Improvement, as not now yielding (not one of forty of them through England) the one fourth part of that profit either to private or publique, which they are respectively capable of.
I have observed in all places in England the great inconveniences that come by the Want of Enclosure, both to private and publique, the irregularity of these Lands that are inclosed, the frequent, and (as things now stand in relation to time past, and Land already set out) unremediable intanglements or intermixture of Interest of severall persons in the same Common, in the same Field, in the same Close, nay sometimes in the same Acre. The inconvenient passages made or allowed between divers grounds, and that not onely, when they belong to severall men, but even when one man is owner of divers grounds; and the truth is, either he that is possest of Lands, is a Lord or Tenant; if Lord, he seldome alters that Form he found his Lands in, whether he received them by Inheritance, or purchase; and if but Tenant, he would count it (for the most part) lost labour, although he did indeed understand both the inconvenience and the right remedy: but I fear neither Lord nor Tenant do so, or at least so, as to lay to heart the Crosses or Losses they or their neighbours do too frequently sustain meerly upon this accompt, or are too carelesse or desperate of the remedie.
I have observed the carelessenesse and wickednesse of Servants and bad neighbours both; which a man shall be sure to meet, let him remove as often, and to what place he will.
I have observed the proneness most of Cattel & Poultry to break into forbidden places, but above all others, commonly kept in England not to speak of Deer and Goats, or of wilde fowl, or the like) Swine, Coneys, and Pigeons, (and some sorts of Poultry, at some seasons) are most inclined to and frequent actors of mischief, and that so great, that men dare hardly consider it seriously, but let it passe to avoid vexation.
Who is it that lives a Countrey-life, but knowes, or may know, and upon enquiry finde, that one pair of old Pigeons eates of one sort or another of Corn, and grain in the year at least 6 bushels, & that there are almost (if not altogether) as many such pairs of Pidgeons, as there are men, women and children in England, and it is plain, they can get none, but either of what you have sowne, or of what you should reap, or of the sheadings in the field, which were better bestowed on your Swine or Poultry, or out of your barne, or rick, or threshing-floor, from whence I suppose you cannot well spare it, or from the manger, standing racks, or dunghill, all which your pigs and hens must want so much. I conclude as to this Creature, that there is no such enemy to the prosperity of England, of his bigness so little taken notice of, or that yields so little return; may I dare affirm, that all the beasts & fouls in England, (wilde fowl, which we cannot so easily prevent, and Swine, and Coneys, which yet return abundantly more profit excepted) do not equalize the losse and damage suffered by this one sort of small birds; but let this serve by way of digression, for the truth is, the Contrivance here principally intended is for the better casting out of Lordships or Farmes in point of Forme, and doth no other way remedy this, but as it contracts your businesse into a close order, making it as easie to discover, and chase away this enemy in one ground, as in another, which is not commonly to be done in other places.
The next destructive Cattel are Coneys, they will eat down the Corn at the first coming up, sometimes to its destruction, they will eat it down all along till Harvest; and if it yet prosper in part, they will stand on their hinder legs, and crop off the ear just at the bottome, and leave the straw standing, I have seen severall fields in a considerable part so served, they will destroy young Woods, by eating the bark away round about a foot high, and in good meadow and pasture make a thousand crosse paths, and in all grounds dig holes under the roots of trees, corn, & c. to a very great prejudice; and this evill is something the worse, in that there is no Fence in the common way against them, but the dog or gun, which is not alwayes allowed, yet to do this little beast right, it is not his fault but his Masters, or those that keeps him in no better order, for I do affirm, that few Creatures under heaven, (as they may be managed) turn to greater profit to the Owners, and yet may they be kept (all things considered) cheaper, and (in a manner) free from doing any hurt to his Owners, or their Neighbours; and so become a most pleasant, profitable, harmlesse creature. And thus to manage this Creature is most properly to be done by such, whose Lands are divided, or sub-divided into some such Forme as these Charts expresse, and in such a Farme it is not uneasie to make these Creatures to do some especiall services even in his life-time.
The third most harmfull beast is the Swine, a Creature so ravenous, that children are scarce safe from a lean sow that hath pigs, and for her to eat her own pigs is no very strange thing; and to eat your Turkeys or Goslings a thing often seen. And as Swine are ordered, there is hardly any thing safe from them; how will they break through almost any hedge, not onely eat, but root up & destroy the Corn abundantly, as likewise any grass, trees, plants, or whatever corn is in their way, or they can come at: what and how great and frequent are the losses abroad, and the nasty inconveniencies at home occasioned by this Creature: And herein they differ, and are worse then all other Cattle, that when they are in the corn they are not easily seen, and (if their owners or keepers misse them not) as too many of those that are called poor people, will not onely willingly not misse them, but (I have seen it, and suffered by it) will on set purpose drive them thither by which means they will sometimes get a haunt of a piece of corn, and go into it so cunningly, that a man can scarce finde where, but being a good way in, they will destroy wholly great spots of a rod or two together, and when a man shall discover them, he had almost as good let them alone, for without a dog they will but play bo-peep, and be running from place to place, but trample down and spoil more, and so they will do a good while also, though you have a dog. Seriously, Sir, I suppose, that though the Hog being fat, and dead is excellent meat, and of so large a body, and good price that he may be worth some pounds, yet there is not one Hog of ten, but (besides the corn given him; after put up to fat) hath one way or other lost, spoiled, destroyed, or devoured twice his price. Most of which inconveniences, as well the nastinesse as the dammage is almost totally prevented by the right Use of this Contrivance, which if, I may truely say, that with some additions to the Common, or for the better management of this Cattle, they are of exceeding Use and Profit equall to Cowes, Sheep, or any other, if not much beyond; but indeed all Cattle almost depend so necessarily on one anothers fellowship, that he that keeps one hath good reason to keep all; (but if any alone, Sheep.)
The fourth necessary sort of Creature fit to be about a Farme, is Poultry of all sorts; whether Water-fowl, as Geese, Ducks, & c. or Land-fowl, as Turkeys, Hens, &c. The first sort are of speciall Use, and require more care then charge in the keeping, which care is eased very much by this Contrivance, and those many ill turns, not unusually done by Geese, prevented with an opportunity given to breed or keep many more without charge. The second sort are exceeding profitable, if bred and fed according to a safe and orderly Rule in a place convenient, allowing a large walk, yet preventing the harme they are apt to do. I am assured both by reason and experience, that very great profit above all charge may be had without much trouble by them that keep great store of these sorts safe and well, which I conceive will be much facilitated by this Contrivance.
All other greater Cattel, as Horses and Mares, &c. Buls, Cowes and Oxen, &c. and all sorts of Sheep, as they are apt to run into every Meadow, better pasture, or corn-grounds they can come at: so are they easier seen or prevented; and besides, it troubles a man lesse to make satisfaction to his Neighbour, or to bear his own losse patiently, when he considers, that such Cattel many times (though not alwayes) are the better for what they have eaten, and may shortly one way or other make him some amends, either by their fat, or Fleece, or milk, or labour, or the like, whereas all the Pigeon, the lean Hog, or the Coney gets irregularly is meerly lost.
And the evill Contrivance and Inter-mixture of wayes and Interests in most places of England is a speciall reason, which many, even of the more Ingenious sort of men, that would fain yet do not attempt or endeavour those many, great, and visible wayes of better improvements that are in nature, and in view, and that because they have no place secure enough, but may every day one before the other expect, that the carelesnesse or wickednesse of their Neighbours, or their own children, or servants (yea, and by mistake sometimes themselves) may let in all or any sorts of these beasts or fowls, (worst of all Hogs or Coneys, which in the common way have most liberty and opportunity) to destroy all their labours and charges in an instant; therefore say they (not very wisely nor industriously though) it is better sit stil then rise up and fall.
Whereas if English men would be resolutely and ingeniously industrious by this, or some other, or better Contrivance, Way, or Means (which I shall gladly subscribe to, when I see it) those dangers may be avoided, and this Nation become in an age or two, as much (almost) beyond what it now is, as it now is beyond Scotland for fertility, or Ireland for good Husbandry. And we need hardly be beholden to any Nation under heaven for any of their Commodities, except SpanishWines and Spices, or some such things, of which we have no simple necessity.
I have observed, that in most parts of England, especially in Champion Countreys, the Pastures lie neer home, and the Woods, Meads, and Corn-land lie at a great distance. And something like it in inclosed grounds also, and that it is common to go through one Close into another, whereas it is plain, that the corne or grasse in the first Close is liable to be eaten and troden down by the Cattle that passe to and again to the Close beyond it. It is also very plain, that all Cattle that are well, lusty, and not of imediate Use, are able to carry themselves to a greater distance, but that Wood, Corn, Hey, or the like, require much time, charge and pains to remove them; I appeal therefore, whether it be not fitter to send such Cattle further off, and have your Corn and Hey, (and Wood too, if need be) neerer home. And for your young, sick or weak, or infected Cattle in this Contrivance, there is provision made for such; as also for your Milch-Cowes at Milking-time, so well, that till I see some better I rest contended with this.
I have observed, that when the foul or home-sted is too neer the dwelling house (as it is in most places) it makes the Inhabitants liable to many inconveniences, and offensive sights and smels, as well within doors, as without: but here I refer my selfe whether that evil is not remedied, and yet the Barns, Stables, &c. neer enough for inspection, which is all the reason for their being neer; for as you have it in this Contrivance, you may at all times with ease view and take accompt of your businesse, and yet be as neat and sweet as in a Burgemasters house in Holland.
Finally, here your house stands in the middle of all your little world (which you may build as your purse and fancy directs, though I could say soemthing as to that in particular, which I take to be as effectuall if need were) enclosed with the Gardens and Orchards, refreshed with the beauty and odour of the blossomes, fruits and flowers, and the sweet melody of the chirping birds, that again encompast with little Closes, that all young, weak, or sick Cattle may be fostered under your own eye without losse or inconvenience, and all bound together as with a girdle, (and surely never had the old proverb, ungirt, unblest, a fitter or fuller sense or application) and all that covered again, as with a fair large cloak of Meadow and Tillage, to which you may commit the corner pasturage, the Cape if you please, or the Sleeves to the Coat (for a Coat as well as a Cloak will serve to cover either knavery or foolery) of old customes or negligence. Here you have your Bake-house Brew-house, Darie, or the like, your Barns, Stables, and Out-houses in such apt places as may serve indifferently for all your occasions. And no one ground to passe through into another, no probability of being trespassed upon by others, or by your own, but the most perfect tight and ample Use of every foot of ground inclosed entire, by all which (I doubt not) will make good what I have sometimes affirmed; that besides all other waves of Improvement that may be farther added, this alone in meer point of Contrivance is enough to improve the value of your Estate one half part; viz. that if it were really worth 100li. per annum before, it will thus become as really worth 150li. per annum, and the charge in casting it into this forme, (especially where no fences are already) little more, in some cases not so much, though I must tell you, you cannot spare in any case more unhappily then here. And besides profit, the ease and pleasure will be better felt then exprest in words.
Very much more might be said in order to this, but it would too farre exceed the bounds of a Letter, and it is also not amisse to see how the World will accept or reject this first: From the hands of him, who subscribes himself ever.
SIR, Your most faithful, thankful Friend, and humble Servant, Cressey Dymock.
An Experiment for the multiplying of Corn, practised neer Paris in France, by some of that new order of Friers, who are there called Peres de lâ doctrine Chrestienne.
INto two French pintes of rain-water, they did put a certain quantity of Cow-dung well rotted, and as much Sheeps-dung and pigeons dung. This water they boiled, till but half a pinte was left, then they strained it through a linnen cloth, and in it dissolved 3 small handfuls of common salt, and as much Salt Peter. This brine they set in some vessel upon hot ashes, and in it they steeped their Seed-corn; which being so ordered, and at the usuall seed-time, being put into barren ground. produced unusual increase, I my selfe have seen one hundred and fourteen eares upon one root, which, they told me, came from one single corn so prepared. This way of theirs differs not much from that which I found in an old Manuscript, and cannot dislike. Take, saith he, rain-water that hath stood in some pool or pond till it putrifie. Put into it good store of dung of horses, kine, sheep, goats, pigeons, hens, and any other beast or bird that feeds upon grass or seeds. An quia herbarum, & seminum Vita media vegetativa in stercoribus illis restiterit exaltanda? Set this mixture eight dayes in the Sun, (or if you be in haste, boil it over the fire half an hour, stirring it all the while,) afterward strain it, and then make it stronger by putting into it more of the foresaid sorts of dung the second time. This having stood as before, strain out, and put into it some common salt, and a little Ox-gall. Into this liquor put your seed-corn; float or scum off all the light corns that swim; let the rest lie in the liquor 24 houres. Then take out your seed-corn, and spread it thin upon a linnen cloth, and dry it in the shadow. Put this seed into barren ground (for in such it will thrive better then in a rich soil) you shall reap at least an hundred-fold.
Another Secret worthy to be tryed by all such as are lovers of the Advancement of Husbandry.
IN the choice of seed-corn, prefer that wheat which is most weighty, as being more masculine and fitter for generation then the lighter graines. In the production of plants, the earth is considered as a female, whose sterility may be much helped by the extraordinary melioration of the seed; As if you take water, which hath bin made fat with horsdung wel rotted, and afterwards dissolve in it as many pounds of Salterrae as you intend to sowe acres. In this water steep the aforesaid weighty seed for 24 hours. So shall you have a better crop then usuall, though you sowe but halfe the usuall quantity of seed, and though your ground be not so often ploughed, nor be at all dunged; nay though it were barren of it selfe. Your harvest will be ripe sooner by a moneth, and by reason of the Salt-peter, this corn will be fitter for store-houses; for there it will lie ten years uncorrupted.
Observations and Animadversions upon the foregoing secrets or experiments: Written by the Author of the large Letter in the Legacy of Husbandry.
COncerning the Experiment from Paris about steeping of Corn, I have told you heretofore that steeping of Barley is used in Kent to take away all soile, (except Drake) and also all light corn, further to accelerate growth, if it be sowne late; and further, if pigeons dung be added, it may be as good as half a dunging; and I think I speak high enough, for that little strength that Corn draweth by this steeping cannot do wonders; and if all that Salt, Niter, Cow-dung, Sheeps, Pigeons dung, of this brine were cast upon the earth, it would not dung a quarter of it, how then can the Extract do so much: I cannot as yet see any great reason for it, unlesse perchance there be some occult vivification of the spirits of the Seed, which as yet I am ignorant to, As for an 114 ears of Corn from one, it's nothing: I have had from Oats 140 without any steeping, or such doings; yet I have used some Art, which I may call a Secret; for I am perswaded very few can do it: but I'le tell it you, and I would all the World did know, for it is a trifle: viz. when the Corn beginneth to spread, to lay either clods or Tileshards, or any broad thing upon it to cause it to spread, and further, let not any corn grow within a foot and a half of it; and this is the great businesse which every one may try (the lands also ought to be excellently good.) Further, I have had above 2000 grains for one, or of one cut in the midst, and above 100 in one ear without steeping.
As to the second Experiment of Brine, I think of it as of the former; onely I think it convenient to adde, that first they are to blame, who think to medicine the earth as Physicians do the Body, and therefore adde such varieties of Dungs, as Cows, Pigeons, Horse, Sheep &c. as so many Radices, Folia, Fructus, Semina, &c. and then adde Salt and Niter as Physicians do Ginger and Mace, then a little Salt and Oxe-gall, as they do Musk and Amber-greese; then boil and strain them Cape colaturam, & dissolve ut prius. I for my part think that our old Grandame the Earth ought not thus to be nursed, and suppose there is more vanity in these then in the Apothecaries Bills. Secondly, Niter is costly: I fear the Crop will not pay the charges; for that I suppose the Countrey-man will consider, though our projecting Husbandman do not. Thirdly, that it's a vanity to overcharge any liquor with too great a quantity of materials. For we know that the power of every thing is finite, and if you put Salt into water, such a proportion it will dissolve, if you put above that proportion, it sinketh to the bottome, and there lies undissolved. Fourthly, that the cause of Fruitfulnesse is not onely the vita media in dung; for when it is totally corrupted, and the vita media gone, it is very fruitfull: further, Chalke, Marle, Nitre, which are exceeding fruitfull, have no vita media. But concerning Fruitfulnesse I have sent you a short Discourse which is onely to shew you the difficulty of the Question, and to stir up some other to attempt it.
As for the Conclusion of the processe (or Experiment) viz. you shall reaplan 100 fold: let me but dig Land, if it be not extreamly barren, I'le wager to have the same increase without all these slibber slops.
As to the last Processe which I like best, having the greatest probabilities; I answer, that to get this Sal Terrae to supply every mans occasion, is more then I know how to obtain, and the trouble great; and I suppose he that hath that Salt needeth not horse-dung; for rain-water I suppose will do better: and further, I desire to know how he would extract it, and how it differeth from Niter: This processe pleaseth me, and I suppose the graines will be excellent and long lasting.
A great Question concerning Fruitfulnesse. Offered to all ingenious Searchers of Nature.
It is a main deficiencie in Husbandry, that though we by experience finde that all the foresaid materials, and divers others, as oft-tilling, Husbandry, seasons, &c. change of seed and Land, resting of Lands, fencing &c. do cause Fertility: yet we are very ignorant of the true causes of Fertility, and know not what Chalk, Ashes, Dung, Marle, Water, Air, Earth Sun, &c. do contribute: whether something Essential, or Accidental; Material or Immaterial; Corporal or Spiritual; Principal or Instrumental; Visible or Invisible: whether Saline, Sulphureous or Mercurial; or Watry, Earthy, Fiery, Aereal: or whether all things are nourished by Vapours, Fumes, Atoms, Effluvia? or by Salt, as Urine, Embrionate or non-specificate? or by Ferments, Odours Acidities? or from a Chaos, or inconfused, indigested, and unspecificated lump? or from a Spermatick, dampish vapour which ascendeth from the Centre of the Earth? or from the Influence of Heaven? or from Water onely impregnated, corrupted or fermented? or whether the Earth, by reason of the Divine Benediction hath an Infinite, multiplicative Vertue, as Fire, and the Seeds of all things have? or whether the multiplicity of Opinions of learned Philosophers (as Aristotle, Rupesc. Sendivog, Norton, Helmont, Des Cartes, Digby, White, Plat. Glaubre) concerning this Subject sheweth the great difficulty of this Question, which they at leasure may peruse. I for my part dare not venture on this vast Ocean in my small bark, lest I be swallowed up; yet if an opportunity presents, shall venture to give some hints, that some more able Pen may engage in this difficult Question which strikes at the Root of Nature, and may unlock some of her choicest treasures. The Lord Bacon hath gathered stubble (as he ingenuously and truly affirms) for the bricks of this foundation; but as yet I have not seen so much as a solid foundation plainly laid by any, on which an ingenious Man might venture to raise a noble Fabrick: I acknowledge the burthen too heavy for my shoulders.FINIS.



