
------
March 28. 1683.
ORdered, that the Three Anatomic Lectures read on the 19, 20, and 21 days of this present Month, in the Theatre of His Majesties Royal College of Physicians in London, by Dr. Walter Charleton, Fellow of the same College, be forthwith Printed, and Published.
Tho. Coxe, President.
------
THREE Anatomic Lectures, CONCERNING 1. The Motion of the Bloud through the Veins and Arteries; 2. The Organic Structure of the Heart; 3. The Efficient Causes of the Hearts Pulsation:
READ On the 19, 20, and 21 days of March 1682/3 IN THE
Anatomic Theatre of His Majesties Royal College of Physicians in London.
------
BY WALTER CHARLETON, M.D. And Fellow of the same College.
------
Published by Command of the most Learned President.
------
LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the Bishopshead in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1983.

------
------
PRAELECTIO I. Of the Circular Motion of the Bloud, and the admirable Effects thereof.
SO plausible and favourable hath the Hypothesis of various Ferments, congenial to and perpetually resident in the various parts, principally in the Viscera of Sanguineous and more perfect Animals, seemed to many of the Virtuosi of this our inquisitive age; that they have not doubted to ascribe to them a powerful energy and necessary influence in all the divers Motions, all the Mutations, all the Concoctions, all the Secretions, and other operations instituted by Nature in such Animals, either for the conservation of them in their single beings, or for the propagation of their respective Species. Nor is it easie for us to name any particular function, any action, though really and manifestly Organical, which the Sectators of this Hypothesis will not presently attribute to some peculiar Ferment lurking and operating in the part, by which that action is done, and conferring (forsooth) somewhat of efficacy toward the doing of it: as if the organical constitution of that part were insufficient to the function and uses for which it was designed, without the help and cooperation of a Specific Ferment; or as if the whole Animal Oeconomy depended upon no other Harmony but that of numerose Fermantations. In a word, they make them only not Omnipotent. As Heraclitus the Ephesian dreamed [panta psychon einai kai daimonon plere] that all places are full of Spirits and Daemons, that presided over human actions: (Diogen. Laert. in vita Heracliti.) So these Gentlemen imagine all the parts of Animals to be full of I know not what Spiritual Ferments, that by occult influence regulate and diversifie their functions. And this Comment many have endeavoured to assert by their Writings, with as much confidence, as if the verity of it were evident, either from cogent reasons, or by Autopsy: when in truth they are no more able to prove by solid Arguments, or by sensible demonstration, the existence of many of their imaginary Fermentative liquors or Spirits in the dissected parts, to which they are pleas'd to consign them; than Heraclitus was able to exhibit to mens sight any one of his Daemons. I say, many of their imaginary Ferments; I do not say, any. Because the Acid Phlegm found in the Stomachs of various Animals, may perhaps so far emulate the nature of a Ferment, as to deserve the same name. For being endowed with an incisive, penetrating, and dissolving faculty; 'tis not improbable but it may conduce to the dissolution and liquation of solid meats, and together with the drink, serve, as a fit Menstruum, to extract the laudable and alimentary parts of them, ad modum tincturae. But this liquation of solid meats in the Stomach, seems to be effected by motions placid, gentle, and imperceptible in the state of health; not by those violent commotions and irrequiet agitations that always proceed from, and accompany Ferments properly so call'd, during their working: as all men that enjoy good health, feed soberly, and keep a regular course of diet, may easily observe in themselves. And therefore this Acid Phlegm cannot properly, and in Philosophical strictness, be referr'd to the family of Ferments. The same may with equal reason be said also of the Bile and Pancreatic juice commixt in the Duodenum. They may perhaps conduce somewhat to the farther attenuation and exaltation of the Chyle; they may also promote both the separation of the Nutritive from the Excrementitious parts of the same Chyle, and the insinuation and permeation of the former through the coats or membranes of the Guts into the milky veins: all this they may do, and yet not by way of Fermentation, whereof there is neither necessity, nor sense in statu sanitatis; and to argue from a preternatural state to a natural, is a Paralogism. Now if neither of these two so much celebrated Ferments, hath any more right to that denomination, than what is precariously derived from some remote and slender analogy or semblance imagined to be betwixt their nature, qualities, and effects, and those observed in genuine and true Ferments; as certainly neither of them yet appears to have: What ought we to think of all the rest of invisible Ferments supposed to reside in places, where hitherto they have never been found? Why may we not, till they shall be by Anatomical and other convincing experiments shewn to us, believe that they have existence no where, but in the brains of fancyful men? For my part, I blush not, even in this venerable Assembly of most Learned men, where I have as many Judges as Auditors, openly to profess my self to be of this belief: because de non apparentibus, & de non existentibus eadem ratio est; and because I have heard an eminent Member of this first and more ancient Royal Society, a man renowned over all Europe for his Philosophical and Anatomical Writings, deliver this judgment of the multiplicity of Natural Ferments fancyed to be in the body of an Animal, that they were a new-found asylum ignorantiae. I say, of Natural Ferments; lest what I have said should be detorted to the exclusion of Praeternatural Fermentations, which I do not deny to be incident sometimes to the bloud and other humours of the body, more signally in Fevers, and some other acute diseases: though perhaps not so often as vulgar Physicians imagine.
What I have hitherto said, may perchance seem to some of my Auditors to be a digression; and they may be apt to think, that I have made my first step in a wrong path. I am therefore obliged, in my own defence, to advertise them, that having proposed to my self to enquire strictly into the natural necessity or Mechanical reasons of the Motions of the Bloud; and finding the aforesaid Comment of Ferments lying, like a block, in my way: I thought it concern'd me rather to remove than to leap over it, and leave it for others to stumble at. For, some there are, and those too, men whose names are deservedly celebrated for their profound knowledge both in Anatomy and the Mathematicks, who in their books have professedly taught, that even the bloud it self, the seat of life, also undergoes a certain natural Fermentation in the heart, lungs, and greater arteries, as necessary to its perfection and vitality. (Joan. Alphons. Borellus de Motu Animal. part. 2. pag. 76. Willisius de Ferment.) A doctrine, which to me (I profess) seems very improbable, and inconsistent with the wisdom of Nature.
Improbable; First, Because of all the various liquors found in the body of an Animal, in statu Naturae, the bloud seems of it self least prone to Fermentation; which is incident chiefly, if not solely, to new and musty liquors: whereas the greatest part by much of the bloud is old, and by repeated Circulations well defaecated in its proper Emunctories, and by insensible transpiration; and by consequence needs no Fermentation. True it is indeed, that new Chyle is ever now and then brought into the rivulet of the bloud, out of the common cistern thereof, by the ductus thoracicus and the Subclavian vein, for a recruit: but in a quantity so small (a few drops perhaps at once; for more will not be found to bear a just proportion, either to the capacity of the common Receptacle of the Chyle, which is but little, or to the narrowness of the Pipe leading from thence to the Subclavian vein) as cannot in reason be thought sufficient to perturb and excite a fermentation in the bloud, with which it is mixt. If a greater quantity of Chyle were mixt with the bloud at one time; certainly the bloud would soon lose its native purple, and put on the white livery of the Chyle, especially in the descending part of the Vena cava, where the commixture is first made: which yet no Anatomist (for ought I know) hath ever observ'd. Secondly, When Ferments are commixt with liquors consisting of heterogeneous particles, they are generally slow in exerting their power, and by degrees insinuate and diffuse their active particles through the whole mass, before they can so far prevail, as to raise an universal commotion and tumult in them; as common experience testifies: but the newly commixt Chyle and bloud are in a moment, at most in the space of a few pulses of the heart, rapt out of the Vena cava, first into the right Ear, and then into the right Ventricle of the heart; so that here is no morula, no competent space of time given, to excite an actual fermentation. Thirdly, Here is wanting also convenient place. To all Fermentations is required fit room, wherein the liquors may have liberty to undergo an impetuose commotion and agitation of all their dissimilar and contrasting particles; nor will the Must of Wine it self ever ferment, if it be kept in close and strong casks, as appears from the making of Stum: but the Vena cava, the Heart, and Arteries are fill'd with bloud even to distention, till by their Systole they squirt it forth, and then in the next moment they are replenished. What room then is left for the bloud to ferment in? Seeing therefore that the bloud is by its own constitution unapt to ferment, as bearing a greater analogy to the nature of Milk, than to that of Wine, whatever the Willisians have said to the contrary; and seeing that neither the small supplies of Chyle which it daily receives, are sufficient to induce, nor the shortness of the time in which it passes through the praecordia, nor the want of convenient room, permit a fermentation: what reason have we to assent to their opinion, who teach, that a fermentation of the bloud is necessary to its perfection and vitality? especially if we farther consider, that the same opinion is also
Inconsistent with the Wisdom of Nature. Whose custom always is, to institute the most direct and compendious methods, for the attainment of her ends; nor ever to use many instruments, where one may suffice, to effect what she hath design'd: abhorring to multiply things, without inevitable necessity. To this her admirable Wisdom then it is injurious, to imagine, that when she had ordained in the bloud a certain placid, regular, and benign motion, by which all the heterogeneous ingredients or constituent parts of it, should be so agitated among themselves, as by their mutual conflict to produce an alternate expansion and contraction, from whence a vital heat results, and upon which original life continually depends: she should notwithstanding institute a second intestine motion, to be at the same time, in the same subject performed, viz. a Fermentation; which seems unnecessary at best, and which probably might not only hinder, and impugn, but also destroy the former. A Fermentation would indeed raise a tumultuous agitation of the same dissimilar elements of the bloud: but such as would be violent, irregular, and of a far different manner from the Vital Mication. But not to insist now upon the manifest disparity of these Two Motions, which may more opportunely be collected from what I shall soon say of the genuine and true one; let it be supposed at present, that both may operate in the same manner, and produce the same effects in the bloud, as to the attenuation and comminution of the grosser, viscid, and unagile parts; and the facilitation of the expansive efforts of the Spiritual, volatile or elastic: yet still it will remain to be inquired, why Nature should institute Two Motions, where either of the two might singly do her work as well, if not better. If therefore any defendent of this opinion, which I have here, en passant, impugned, shall vouchsafe so far to illuminate my gloomy understanding, as to solve this Problem: I shall acknowledge the favour, and recant my opposition of it. Mean while, I will suspend the farther consideration thereof, and now address my self to the more important part of my present province, the true and undoubted Motions of the Bloud, viz. the Mication, and the Circulation: by both which, though divers in their origines and kinds, yet mutually helping each other, and conducing the one to the accension as it were of original life, the other to the distribution of influent life, the bloud is perpetually moved in the vessels that contain it.
By the FORMER of these, the vital spirits, or if you please the elastick particles of the bloud, now passing through the Ventricles of the heart, from their own natural force or expansive energy, endeavour to expand or unbend themselves; while the grosser and viscid parts resist that endeavour to expansion, by compressing them. Hence instantly, and by natural necessity, arises a certain Colluctation or mutual striving betwixt the expansive motion or endeavour of the Vital Spirits, on one part, and the renitency of the grosser parts of the bloud, on the other. And from this Colluctation, an actual heat is quickly excited or kindled in the bloud: actual heat being nothing else but an expansive luctation of the particles of the body or subject in which it is, as I professedly labour'd to evince from various instances, and a strong chain of propositions, when I first had the honour to sit in this Chair. Moreover, because this expansive luctation is not violent, nor unequal, nor irregular, nor consequently noxious or hostile to the nature of the bloud; but on the contrary always (in statu Naturae) moderate, equal, regular, amicable, and tending not only to the conservation of the bloud, but also to the exaltation of all its faculties and operations: and because it proceeds from an internal principle, from the energy of the vital spirit contain'd in and ruling the bloud, or (if this be more intelligible) from the Elasticity of the aereal particles commixt with the bloud: therefore the brisk motion or heat thence resulting, is also vital. For in that very expansive motion of the bloud, doth the formal reason of life originally consist: which Theorem also I have formerly, in this place, endeavour'd to explicate and establish. This admirable motion, from the various notions or conceptions which Learned men have formed of it in their minds, hath acquir'd various names. By some it is call'd motus sanguinis intestinus sive spontaneus, because it arises from an internal principle, the expansive endeavour of the spirituose, or elastic parts of the bloud, and to distinguish it from the circular motion, which is impress'd by an external Movent, viz. the Heart. By others, Motus fermentationis vitalis, from the similitude they fancyed between it and common fermentations: but improperly, for the reasons by me just now alledged. By others again (Alphons. Berellus de mot. animal.), motus oscillatorius, from the resemblance it hath of the Oscillation or swinging of a Pendulum, whose motion describes a Cycloid (Christianus Hugenius, de Motu horologii oscillatorii, part. 1), and by others (Glisson. lib. de ventriculo & intestin. & Charleton, Oeconomiaelig; Animalis exercitat. 6.), Micatio sanguinis, the panting, or reciprocal expansion and compression of the parts of the bloud. Of these denominations, the two last seem to me more fully and emphatically than the rest to signifie the nature and manner of the thing denominated; as equally comprehending the double motion in a single appellation. Wherefore I intend hereafter to use these promiscuously, when there shall occur to me any occasion of mentioning the same motion. Mean while, I proceed to
The LATER motion, the CIRCULATION of the Bloud; the most noble and most useful of all modern inventions, first obscurely hinted (as some think) by Cesalpinus, but afterward with prodigious sagacity, most exact judgment, and happy diligence investigated, and with such convincing evidence demonstrated by our immortal Dr. Harvey, that now the verity thereof is no longer doubted of in the world. (In Exercitat. Peripatet.) I wish the same were as well understood, as it is generally acknowledged: and lest I be thought only to wish this excellent knowledge, and of so great importance to Physicians, I will now again do my best devoir to explain so much of the mystery, as I my self have formerly left not sufficiently explicated: omitting to recite what is vulgarly taught in the Schools and Books of Anatomists, and touching only those things, which have been either pretermitted, or not rightly explicated by others, concerning the Causes, Mechanical modes, and circumstances of this life-conserving motion.
There intervenes (ye know) a double pause or respite, which by Anatomists is call'd perisystole cordis, between the two contrary motions of the heart; one betwixt the diastole and the systole, another betwixt the systole and the diastole: and this of absolute necessity, because it is impossible, that the same body should perform two contrary motions, without a morula or space of time, how short soever, be interposed betwixt them. Ye know also, that the force impelling the bloud, which is the Compression of the heart, doth not act continually, but interruptedly or per vices, short and almost isochronic or equal quiets interposed: So that the bloud express'd by the heart, doth not flow thence in a continued course, as rivers and fountains do, that are without intermission carried on by the weight of their waters; but gush forth and stop alternately, though this vicissitude be exactly regular, and proceeds in a constant order. Now these things considered, it may seem consentaneous to conclude, that the motion of the bloud cannot be continuus, since two pauses or quiets are interposed betwixt every two pulsations or Systoles of the heart, during each of which the motion ceases: but on the contrary ought to be esteem'd and call'd an interrupted and mixt motion. And yet notwithstanding the verisimilitude of this conclusion, I doubt not to lay down and expose to your examination this
First PROPOSITION, That the bloud is carried in a round through the body of an Animal, in a truly continued, and never interrupted motion.

This perhaps may sound like a Paradox: but that shall not a-whit discourage me from asserting it, while I remember that remarkable sentence of Minutius Felix (in Octavio) Inest & in incredibili verum, & in verisimili mendacium.
Though it be true and evident, that the heart doth not, in the time of its pauses, express any Bloud into the Arteries, yet it is not true, that the bloud contain'd in the Arteries, in the Viscera, in the habit of the body, and in the Veins, doth at the same time stagnate, and stop its course: but on the contrary is always carried on in its journey, though with unequal velocity. First, the Verity of this appears in the Arteries. For the afflux of bloud from the heart being wholly intercepted, either by a Ligature applied to the aorta at its original, or by cutting out the heart it self, as is commonly done in Frogs and Vipers; we see, that nevertheless the bloud wherewith the Arteries were fill'd, is by degrees squeez'd out, so that they are soon after left altogether empty. And doubtless this exinanition of the Arteries happens, because they by their own spontaneous motion constringe themselves, and contracting their Circular Fibres, express the bloud into the habit of the parts: and are at the same time compress'd also by the contraction and tension, or the peristaltick motion of all the Muscles of the Body. From the observation of this vulgar Phaenomenon, viz. the emptiness of the Arteries in dead bodies; the Ancients perhaps took occasion to believe and teach, that not bloud, but only Vital Spirits are contein'd in the Arteries. Secondly, this appears also in the Veins. For, that the bloud doth continually flow on in them likewise, not only when it is urged forward by the Arterial Bloud pursuing it, but even in the time of the hearts pauses; is evinced from this, that then the bloud runs on through the trunk of the Vena cava to replenish the right Ventricle of the heart. But why do I mis-spend time in alledging reasons to prove a truth that is manifest to sense in Phlebotomy? no sooner is a Vein open'd, than the Bloud flows forth with a swift stream, and while the wound is open, continues to flow without pauses or interruption, which is a demonstration of the thing proposed, viz. of the continual motion of the Bloud in the Veins.
Being thus assured of the effect, let us proceed to investigate the Causes; which are not equally evident, nor can we hope certainly to solve this Problem, without enquiring the Mechanical reason of the continual motion of the Bloud through the Veins. This therefore I will now attempt to do. That Nature hath instituted no immediate Communication betwixt the Capillary Arteries and the Capillary Veins, per anastomôsin, is manifest to sense, and now acknowledged by all Learned Anatomists: and therefore it cannot stand with reason to imagin that the Bloud in its Circular course is emitted immediately out of the Arteries into the Veins, these vessels being separate. And though we opine, that there is some secret communication betwixt the extreme Orifices of the Arteries and those of the Capillary veins, by the intermediate Spongy substance of the flesh, Viscera, and glandules, or by the Cribrose substance of the Bones, as by the Pores of a Pumice stone: yet we are still to seek, by what motive force the bloud may be carried on from those intermediate Porosities, and insinuated into the veins. First, because 'tis consentaneous, that the impulsive force, whereby the Systole of the heart squirts the Bloud into the Arteries, is by degrees weakned, and at length languid in those streights of the extreme vessels, and of the intermediate Porosities. Secondly, Because the Orifices of the Capillary veins cannot continue always open and dilated; their consistence being not hard and bony, but membranose, soft and slippery; so that they are apt to be closed by conniving, and consequently to hinder the ingress of the bloud newly arrived. Thirdly, Because here we can have no recourse to the compression of the Viscera, and the Muscles, whereby the bloud should be squeez'd into the Orifices of the Capillary veins; for we see, that the bloud is suckt up by the Capillary veins, not only when the Muscles are invigorated and upon the stretch, but also when they are quiet and relaxed, and do not exercise their compressive power; as is most evident in sleep, when the Circulation proceeds without intermission. This is confirm'd from hence, that in the Brain, in the Medullary substance of the bones, where no compression can be admitted, the Capillary veins receive the bloud as freely as in the softer flesh it self. Seeing then that the effect cannot be denied, viz. that all the bloud effused out of the Arteries is after absorpt and carried off by the Veins, to be brought back again into the heart; and seeing also that this is not effected by way of Attraction, there being no such thing as attraction in Nature, as I have more than once elsewhere proved: we are compell'd to assert, that the Bloud is imbibed by the Capillary Veins for the same reason, and by the same Mechanick action, by which Syphons, Sponges, Filtres, Chords, and all Porose bodies are penetrated by water with which they are moistned: which power is no other than the gravity of the fluid it self, which is augmented by the impetus of its proper motion, and by the impulse communicated to it from external force. So the motive force of Gravity, which the bloud can want no more than water can, when it finds the small chanels of the Capillary veins open (for they can never be so closely constringed by the flagging and connivency of their thin membranes, as to leave no entrance for a fluid; as appears in the Pores of Ropes how hard soever twisted) must of necessity overcome the weak resistence of the streights in all Filtres and Porose bodies: and consequently the bloud may be insinuated into the Capillary veins by a Mechanic action like that of Filtration. If this proposition be true, the greatest difficulty occurring in the whole mystery of the Circulation of the bloud, is now at length solved.
The bloud having in this manner passed the aforesaid streights, and entred into the Canales of the small veins, by the same motive force, whereby it was insinuated (for such an ingress is not possible without motion) may be advanced a little farther in its way by its proper force, and by external force, and also by the impulse of the new bloud following behind; as we see water suckt up by a Filtre, to be carried on to the end of the list. Afterward, because many small veins meeting together, make one wider ductus or pipe; and because in this larger pipe the former impulsive force of necessity grows more and more languid and faint by degrees, and by consequence the motion of the bloud is retarded: therefore it stands in need of some auxiliary forces, to be carried on the rest of its journey. These are, First, the force by which the Circular Fibres of the Veins, that naturally have a peristaltic virtue, contract themselves always after they have been stretch'd, as all Nervose and other tensile bodies are observ'd to do: Secondly, The Compression of the Veins by the weight of the Circumambient air or Atmosphear, and the Elastic virtue of the air inspired: Thirdly, The Tonic motion of the Muscles, when they act; together with the various motions of the Viscera, and of humours discurrent through the body; all which more or less compress the veins. Now, that the manner how this compression promotes the continual decurse of the bloud in the Veins, may be the more fully and clearly understood; I will take liberty to lay down this
Second PROPOSITION.That by the artifice of the Valves, the Compressions of the Veins protrude the Bloud toward the heart with a motion doubly swifter; not indeed in a continual flux, but with little pauses interpos'd, and with unequal velocities
We here behold in the Grural vein slit open from end to end, certain Valves placed at unequal distances in the inside of the Vein: (Figure I.) which for demonstration sake are accurately represented in this Figure expos'd to sight. (Figure II.) These Valves (ye see) are nothing but half pockets of a membranose substance, or little bladders affixt to the sides or walls of the Vein, and resembled by AONMP. and BONQR. They are found sometimes single, sometimes in pairs placed one opposite to the other, and laterally touching each other; as at NO. the convex tops of which pair respect the Capillary beginnings of the Veins beyond HL; but the Orifices of their cavities PO, RO, open toward the heart, have respect to the parts IK. Now I am to demonstrate, that from this structure and situation of the Valves, it is necessary that the Bloud be protruded toward the heart. Imagine then, that the same portion of the Vein HMQL is replete with bloud; and because by the circular Fibres of the Vein itself, and by the ambient Muscles, and perhaps also by the gravity of the Atmosphear, one part of the Vein is constringed after another all along; it must be, that the lateral walls ST come nearer to each other toward V: and then the Vein so girded will lose its Cylindrical form, and be turn'd into two little funnels, HVL, MVQ; which are less capacious than the former Cylinder, and therefore the bloud which was contained in the spaces VHS, and VLT, will be expell'd out of the Orifice HL; but the remaining quantity of bloud contained in the spaces VSM, and VQT, will be squeez'd without the Orifice MQ, toward IK. It appears then, that from the abovementioned compression of the sides or walls of the Vein, the bloud is express'd in equal quantity to the opposite parts; and this would certainly happen, if the Valves were removed. But because to the walls of the Vein within, MP, QR, are fastned two Valves; it is necessary, that the bloud impuls'd by a compression made in ST, be forced through the narrow chink NO; because the yielding fluid contain'd in the cavities of the Valves, and urged by the advenient bloud, is constringed, and thrust out of them; and then instantly the sides of the Valves, that before touched each other, NO, receding one from another, leave an open way, by which the flux of bloud coming on from MSTQ, may be insinuated, and pass forward beyond AB. Again, after the bloud hath passed the confines of the Valves PO, RO, there necessarily follows a restriction of the little chink NO. For, the bloud it self must, by reason of its heavy bulk, and fluidity, fill the little baggs of the Valves, and so their soft and pliable sides being dilated till they mutually touch, ought closely to shut the rimula NO.
Moreover, because the Vein is not constringed in all its parts at the same time, but part after part successively; therefore after the bloud is transferr'd beyond the Valves within the little funnel ABCD, there follows a constriction of the walls AD, BC, in the same time, in which ST is not constringed. And because by reason of the close shutting of the rimula NO, half the bloud, that was contain'd in the spaces EAG, FBG, cannot flow back toward AB, finding the obstacle AOB fill'd with bloud, and retain'd by the Valves; it is compell'd with a reflex motion, like that of a Tennis-ball rebounding from the wall, to flow toward DC: and since by the same compression, the Bloud that was contain'd in the spaces EDG, FCG, is protruded beyond DC: therefore a double quantity of bloud is in the same time, in which the compression is made, expelled through that same aperture DC: but when a double quantity of a fluid is in the same time emitted at the same Orifice, it must run out with a double Velocity. Thus is our Proposition verified. And as to single Valves; from what hath been said of the use of double, it may easily and genuinely be inferred, that they also help to promote the course of the bloud, though but half so much as the double. Wherefore Natures wisdom is admirable in placing single Valves both at less distance one above another, and for the most part where the Cavity of the Vein is a little narrower, or where a less Vein laterally exonerates it self into a greater: in both which cases the necessity of this demonstrated acceleration of the motion of the Bloud, seems to be less. In the trunk of the Vena cava no valves are found; as well because of its ample Cavity, as because of its contiguity to the trunk of the great Artery, by whose pulsations it cannot but be somewhat compress'd, and consequently the Bloud flowing through it, proportionately promoted. In the Jugular veins also none have yet been observed; probably because in them the bloud descends swiftly enough, from its own weight and fluidity. In small veins they are not placed; unless in the Coronary veins of the heart, just at the place where they empty themselves into the right Ventricle of the heart: and of these too the use is, not to promote the course of bloud, of which there is no need in so small a circuit; but only to prevent the reflux of it out of that Ventricle, in the systole of the heart, as appears from their situation, and from their conformation. Nor are any found in the Arteries, in which the bloud, with mighty force impulst by the constriction of the heart, and of the Arteries, needs no additional machine to accelerate its motion: except those that are placed in the inlet and outlet of the left Ventricle, to obviate the regurgitation of the bloud into the arteria venosa, and out of the aorta into the left Ventricle; and the two very little Valves fited in the two Coronary Arteries, at their origine from the aorta, to prohibit the regress of the bloud into the aorta.  
If this Artifice of the Valves affixt within the veins be so necessary to promote the reflux of the bloud toward the heart; certainly he that first discovered them, deserves to be remembred with honour. But who was that fortunate man?
Fabricius ab Aquapendente put in his claim to the glory of the invention, as wholly due to himself; in these very words. (Tractatu 4. de venar. Ostiolis.) De his itaque [ostiolis nempe venarum] locuturus, subit primùm mirari, quomodo ostiola haec, ad hanc usque aetatem, tam priscos, quàm recentiores Anatomicos adeo latuerint; ut non solùm nulla mentio de ipsis facta sit, sed neque aliquis prius haec viderit, quàm Anno Domini Septuagesimo quarto supra millesimum & quingentesimum, quo à me summa cum laetitia inter dissecandum observata fuere.
But Padre Fulgentio professly ascribes the invention to that prodigy of Wisdom, Learning, and Virtue, Padre Paolo the Venetian: at the same time openly accusing Aquapendens of disingenuous arrogance and theft, for challenging to himself the honour of having first discovered the Valves, to which he had no right; and for stealing the glory due only to Father Paul. The sence of his impeachment is this. (In vita Patris Pauli.) "The whole Tractate concerning the Eye, which passeth under the name of Aquapendens, or at least so much of it as contains new and rare Speculations and Experiments, is the work of Padre Paolo; whereof I have had speech with some, that were eye-witnesses, and knew that a due part of the praise was not attributed to him that deserv'd it all. But much more in another matter of more moment, which was the finding out of those Valvulae, those inward shuts or folds that are within the Veins. Of which argument I do not find, that any, either ancient or Modern, hath made mention; because it was a thing unthought of till these times, when Aquapendens moved the question in a publick Anatomy. But there are still living many eminent and Learned Physicians, among whom are Santorio, and Pietro Asselineo a Frenchman, who certainly know, that it was no Speculation, nor invention of Aquapendens, but of Padre Paolo. Who considering the weight of the bloud, grew into an opinion, that it could not stay in the Veins, except there were some bunch to hold it in, some folds or shuttings, at the opening and closing of which there was given a passage and necessary AEquilibrium to life. And upon his own natural judgment he set himself to cutting with more accurate observation, and so found out those Valves, &c."
Having thus faithfully recited the Pleas of these two great men, I leave it to you to decide the controversie, and to fix the Laurel on the head of which of the Competitors you please. For my part, if my judgment were considerable, I should declare my self on Padre Paolo's side, as to the invention; and allow to Aquapendens the honour of being the first that by writing made the thing known to the world. Understand me, I beseech you, only of the Valves themselves, not of the true use of them, which neither Aquapendens, nor the Father had the happiness to discover.
Not Aquapendens; because of the two uses by him assign'd to these Valves (which he most improperly named Ostiola) namely the corroboration of the Veins, which might otherwise be by the bloud every where distended and broken into varices; and the retardation of the bloud in the Veins, that so all parts of the body might have time to take in their due shares of bloud, for their nourishment, and not have their meat (forsooth) snatcht away before they have fill'd their bellies: of these two mighty uses, I say, neither is true, and both are raised upon this Supposition, that the course of the bloud is out of the greater and superiour Veins into the smaller and inferiour; which is most evidently false even by the testimony of the sight. But lest I be thought, either not well to understand, or to misrepresent his meaning; I am obliged to recite his own words. (Aquapend. Tract. 4. de Venar. Ostiolis.) Nam cùm in varicibus, in quibus aut laxari, aut rumpi Ostiola par est, plus minusve dilatatas semper venas conspiciamus; dicere proculdubiò tutò possumus, ad prohibendam quoque venarum distensionem fuisse Ostiola à Summo Opifice fabrefacta, &c. Thus far then I have done him no wrong. He proceeds. Erat profectò necessaria Ostiolorum constructio in artuum venis, quae non exiguae, sed vel magnae, vel moderatae sunt magnitudinis; ut scilicet sanguis ubique eatenus retardetur, quatenus cuique particulae alimento fruendi congruum tempus detur, quod alioqui propter artuum declivem situm consertim ac rapidi fluminis instar in artuum extremitates universus conflueret, ac colligeretur, idque tum harum partium tumore, tum superpositarum marcore. Here also I have faithfully interpreted his words, and ye see that he thought the contrivement of the Valves necessary to retard the motion of the bloud, because he took it for granted, that the bloud descended through the greater Veins into the less: grossly erring in both opinions. For, that the former is false, we have seen demonstrated from the construction and situation of the Valves themselves: and that the latter also is false and absurd, is known to all who understand any thing of the Circulation of the Bloud. To these errors he hath in the same Page added a third much more extravagant; which is, that the bloud is by a flux and reflux perpetually carried forward and backward in the Arteries. For, attempting to give the reason, why Nature hath framed no Valves in the Cavities of the Arteries, he saith; Arteriis autem ostiola non fuêre necessaria, neque ad distensionem prohibendam, propter tunicae crassitiem, ac robur neque ad sanguinem remorandum, quòd sanguinis fluxus refluxusque in Arteriis perpetuò fiat. It appears then, that this famous Anatomist, who in many other things deserved well of the Commonwealth of Physicians; had no just title to the honour of having first invented the true and genuine use of the Valves: nay, that he understood no more the Mechanic reason of their conformation, than if he had never heard of or seen them.
Nor in truth did Father Paul (whom yet I never can mention without secret veneration) if the aforerecited account, and what follows immediately after, given by his most intimate friend during his life, and after his Historian, Fulgentio, be true and full. For in Fulgentio's narration of the manner how the Father came first to find out the Valves, there is this passage. "And upon his own natural judgment he set himself to cutting with more exquisite observation, whereupon he found out those Valvulae, and the right use of them; which do not only stop and hinder the bloud from dilating it self by its weight into the Veins (as we observe in some crooked and swell'd knots) but also that bloud running up and down with so much liberty, and in so great quantity, it might easily suffocate the natural heat of those parts, which ought to receive their nourishment from it." Whence it is plainly apparent, that the Father also attributed a double use to the Valves: one, the very same with the former dreamt of by Aquapendens, who probably borrowed it of the Father; viz. to prevent the dilatation of the bloud into Varices, by stopping its impetuous motion up and down in the Veins: the other, quite contrary to Aquapendens's second use, viz. to prevent a surfeit of the parts upon too much bloud, and an extinction or suffocation of their natural heat by that excess; whereas Aquapendens fear'd they would be famisht, if the Valves did not detain their food, as Tantalus is feign'd to be. Now if these were truly the Father's Sentiments concerning the Valves, certainly he had no right conception of Natures design in making them; as may be collected from the precedent demonstration of their true use.
To come then to a conclusion, and draw all the lines of this scrutiny to a point; since it is evident, that neither Father Paul himself, nor his disciple Aquapendens had a right notion of the proper use of the Valves; and that both believed the bloud to flow out of the greater Veins into the less, which the Fabric and situation of the Valves plainly contradict: it necessarily follows, that neither of them could be Author of that much more noble and more difficult invention of the CIRCULATION of the bloud, which it was morally impossible for any man to deduce from their absurd opinions concerning the use of the Valves, and the glory of which is wholly due to that incomparable man Dr. HARVY. Who by admirable Sagacity of Spirit, by numerose Experiments and Observations Anatomical, and by assiduous Meditation, perhaps also by the secret Manuduction of Fate, that had reserved the secret for his knowledge, attained at length to the invidiose felicity of finding it out, and revealing it to the world. I wonder therefore that some men of not obscure names in the Catalogue of Anatomists, have shewn themselves so ungrateful and envious toward this immortal man, as to ascribe this divine invention to Padre Paolo: I mean, Joh. Walaeus and Tho. Bartholinus. The former of whom doubted not to write thus. (Joh. Waaeus epist. 1. de motu Chyli & Sanguinis.) Vir incomparabilis Paulus Servita Venetus Valvularum in venis fabricam observavit accuratiùs, quam magnus Anatomicus Fabricius ab Aquapendente postea editit, & ex ea Valvularum constitutione aliisque experimentis hunc sanguinis motum [puta Circularem] deduxit, egregioq; scripto asseruit, quod etiamnum intelligo apud Venetos asservari. Ab hoc Servita edoctus vir doctissimus Gulielmus Harveius sanguinis hunc motum accuratiùs indagavit, inventis auxit, probavit firmiùs, & suo divulgavit nomine. The other had the confidence to affirm, that Veslingius had communicated to him, as a secret never to be revealed (forsooth) to any third person, that the Circulation of the bloud was the invention of Father Paul the Servite, who had written a book of it, which was in the custody of Fulgentio at Venice. (Thom. Bartholin. epist. Medicinal. centur. 1. epist. 26.) To refute this palpable fiction, to what I have already said of Father Paul's ignorance of the right use of the Valves, I need add only this, that if Fulgentio had had in his hands any such Manuscript of the Fathers, as these Detractors have imagined; 'tis wonderful strange he should never so much as mention either that or the Circulation in his whole History of the Father's life; when of all the subtle Speculations and discoveries of natural secrets by him attributed to the Father, nothing would have so much conduced to the propagation of his glory, as that. Here therefore I put an end to this long digression, to which the necessary contemplation of the Valves gave an inviting occasion, and which, being intended only to do right to the venerable memory of Dr. Harvy, all lovers of truth, as well as all Members of this Noble Society will (I presume) easily pardon.  
Having inquired into the velocity of the motion of the bloud in the Veins, and the mechanic causes thereof; let us next consider the velocity of the motion of the same bloud in the Arteries. For the clearer understanding of which I lay down this Third Proposition,
PROPOSITION III. That the Arteries of an Animal, their constriction or pulsation being complete, do not remain wholly empty of Bloud.
Evident it is even to sense, that all the veins of a Sanguineous Animal taken together, are larger or more capacious, perhaps in a quadruple proportion, than all the Arteries put together: and the whole mass of bloud runs through all both Veins and Arteries, which mass in full-grown men commonly exceeds not 18, or 20 pints: and though the Veins, by reason of their transparent coats, always appear full of bloud, yet a man may doubt, whether the Arteries also be always full; that is, whether they only give passage to the bloud in the time of the pulsation, and then in the time of their quiet remain wholly empty, or not. To resolve this doubt therefore, I say, that the Arteries, if they were wholly empty in the intervals of their pulsations, then being laid naked to the sight, they would appear constringed and lank, like chords extended: but our eyes assure us, that on the contrary they retain their round and plump figure, and being press'd by the finger resist the pressure; neither of which can possibly consist with a total exinanition. Again, the Veins being laid naked, if, after the pulsation of the heart, the Arteries remain'd empty; then certainly would the pipes of the Veins by the quantity of 5 pints of bloud crouded into them more than what they are proportion'd to contain, be distended at least a third part more than they ought: but this is sensibly false, for their coats are not distended beyond their usual rate. Ergo, the Arteries are at no time wholly empty.
Moreover, in Animals whose Arteries are transparent, as in Snakes, Vipers, Eels, Froggs, &c. we may from their Purple or bluish colour perceive the Arteries to be full of bloud. Which is alone sufficient to evince, that the Arteries do not remain empty after the pulsation of the heart, but contain at least a 4th part of the whole mass of bloud, which in a man is about 5 pints.
Yet farther, the Arteries, in the moment of their pulsation, are highly turgid, when yet not above 3 ounces of bloud is emitted into them by the Systole of the heart. Therefore, if before the Systole the Arteries were wholly empty, a space 20 times greater than their bulk is, would inevitably be filled by the 3 ounces of bloud emitted by the heart: but this certainly is impossible without such a rarefaction of the bloud, which no man of common sense will admit. Therefore to replenish so great a vacuity in the Arteries, there must come into them five pints of bloud, either from the heart, or back, out of the Veins: but neither of these is possible in nature.
Let us add, that 3 ounces of bloud emitted by the Systole of the heart, cannot fill a space greater than half a foot of the next Arteries to the heart. Therefore, if the Arteries were empty before the Systole; truly all the rest of the Arteries would remain empty also in the following Systole; and consequently could not beat at the same time with the heart, and the Circulation of the bloud through them would be interrupted or discontinued, contrary to the mechanic necessity thereof.
In fine, we are convinced by common experience, when an Artery, whether it be great or small, is cut, the bloud is in every pulsation squirted out with mighty violence. Now it is impossible this should happen, unless all the Arteries were full of bloud all along from their beginning to their end; because the violence of the stream of bloud gushing from the incision, hath no other efficient cause, but the protrusion of the bloud coming on behind and urging the antecedent. But in the following pulsation there is an accession of no more than 3 ounces of bloud; which cannot by its quantity replenish half the capacity of the Arteries. Therefore unless there remain, after every pulsation, 5 pints of bloud in the Arteries, they cannot be made turgid again in the following pulsation. So that nothing is more certain or more evident than this, that in a living Animal the Arteries are never empty. Quod erat ostendendum.
From the praecedent Theorem naturally arises this Consectary:
That after the pulsation of the heart, there remains in the Arteries the 4th part of the whole mass of bloud conteined in the body of an Animal; and in a man commonly about 5 pints: and that the proportion of bloud expressed by the Systole of the heart into the Arteries, is about one twentieth part of the bloud contain'd in them. As also that 3 ounces of bloud ejected out of the heart into the Arteries, fill a space in the Arteries next to the heart no greater than half a foot, namely so much as is triple, or quadruple to the latitude of the Ventricles of the heart.
PROPOSITION.That the motion of the Bloud in the Arteries, is threefold swifter than the motion of the Heart, that impells the Bloud;
Because in the same time are absolved all these motions, viz. the dilatation of the Pores of the heart, the restriction of its Cavities by the swelling inward of the walls of the Ventricles, the expulsion of the bloud contein'd in the Ventricles, the motion of the expulsed bloud in the Arteries, and the promotion of the mass of bloud praeexistent in them, caused by the urgency of the new bloud coming on out of the heart: all these actions, I say, are performed in the same time.
And it appears, that the three former operations are performed with the same velocity in the heart, because the Fibres of the heart, by reason of their abbreviation, are with the same motion moved through the same space of the amplitude of the Ventricles, through which they are moved by restringing the same Ventricles, and squirting out the bloud that was conteined in them. And the two last operations likewise are performed with the same velocity. For look how much space the bloud expelled out of the heart runs through in the Arteries, just so much space must the mass of bloud praeexistent in them be driven through, in the same time; because one part of the bloud must give way to another urging it forward, as fast as that comes on behind.
But if the motion of the constriction of the heart be compared with the progressive motion of the bloud in the Arteries; then doubtless they will not be found to be of equal velocity: because the former motion, viz. of the constriction of the heart, is made through a space equal to the latitude of the Ventricles of the heart, which at most excedes not 3 inches breadth: but the space through which the 3 ounces of bloud expressed out of the heart, run in the Arteries, is equal to the length of half a foot. Therefore the space will be triple at least to the space of the former motion: and yet both these motions are performed in the same time. Ergo, the motion of the bloud in the Arteries is threefold swifter than the motion of the heart, that causes it. Quod erat propositum.
I add this remark, that the motion of the bloud in the Arteries is always the same, whether the three ounces of bloud emitted into them out of the heart, exactly fill the space dilated in them; or whether any portion of it be after their repletion expell'd out of them. For in both cases, the bloud praeexistent in the Arteries, is just so much promoved in its course, as 3 ounces newly emitted take up of space, which run through more of length than half a foot.  
Here I cannot fairly decline to encounter a vulgar error, that stands in my way. Which is, That the bloud is expelled out of the Orifices of the Arteries into the substance of the Parts, by no other cause but the constriction of the Heart. To refute which I will assert this
PROPOSITION,That the cause expelling the Bloud out of the Arteries, is not the Systole of the Heart alone, but the constrictive or peristaltic motion of the Arteries themselves naturally and necessarily succeeding their expansion.
To the pulsation of the heart two effects are subsequent, viz. the repletion of the Arteries by the bloud emitted into them, and the expulsion of the same bloud out of them into the habit of the parts. Now certainly these two operations cannot be performed together or at the same time; because the former is done by dilatation, and the other by constriction of the same Arteries, which two contrary motions cannot be co&rehy;incident. Wherefore it is of absolute necessity, that the repletion of the Arteries be precedent, and the evacuation be subsequent.
But the repletion cannot be made without a violent distention of the transverse or circular Fibres of the Arteries, and we all know, that all the Fibres of vessels, no less than those of the Muscles, of the Guts, Stomach, Tendons, Membranes, and the like Fibrose parts, naturally resist distraction, and have a power of contracting themselves after extension. Yea more, we see that all Fibres even in their natural posture are somewhat upon the stretch: for when they are cut, they instantly shorten themselves toward both ends: which would not happen, if they had been constituted in a middle state betwixt laxity and extension, as a Bow unbent is quiet, suffering neither contraction nor distraction of its parts.
Now if all Fibres even in their natural state suffer some degree of stretching; certainly when the Arteries are replenisht with bloud, their cavity must be dilated; and in the dilatation of their cavity, their transverse or circular Fibres must suffer much more stretching, than they did before. And because to this dilatation of the Arteries a constriction immediately succeeds, which is not possible to be effected without an abbreviation of the circular Fibres of the Arteries; and because that abbreviation or contraction is connatural to the Fibres themselves: therefore it is impossible, that the Arteries, after that violent stretching caused by their repletion and turgency, should not exercise, by natural necessity, that mechanic power they have of contracting themselves, by vertue of their circular Fibres girding them inward: and equally impossible, that the Arteries should so contract themselves, without expelling at the same time out of their Orifices, the bloud that dilated them. Whence it appears beyond dispute, that the spontaneous constriction of the distended Arteries is the cause of the expulsion of the bloud out of them into the substance of the parts; contrary to their opinion, who ascribe this expulsion only to the Systole of the heart.  
The natural method of acquiring Science, ye know, is to begin from things more known, and then to advance to things less known; to procede from effects to their causes. Seeing therefore that we are now certain that the bloud in Aminals is carried by a perpetual circular motion through all parts of the body; our next business is to enquire, what are the Causes of this admirable motion, as well the final as the efficient.
I begin from the final; it being a question worthy our consideration, why or to what end Nature, all whose counsels and actions are ordained by an infinite wisdom, hath instituted this rapid Circulation of the bloud.
Constant it is even from common experience, that whenever the bloud is quiet or ceases from motion, whether within or without the body of an Animal, the red and grumose part of it soon curdles, and is separated from the serose or albumen: and so the constitution or contexture of it is dissolved and corrupted: whereas on the contrary, while the bloud continues in perpetual motion within its vessels in the body of a living Animal, so long the ordinate mixture of its elements, due temper, and vital constitution of it is conserved; for mechanical reasons in our ensuing discourse to be explained.
It seems then, that such a mixture of the constituent parts of the bloud, upon which the vitality of it doth necessarily depend, cannot be otherwise conserved, than by a continual agitation and concussion made in the vessels, first by the heart, with strong force impelling the bloud through the Arteries; then, that impulsive force languishing by filtration in the spaces intermediate betwixt the Arteries and Veins; next in the Veins, by the constriction of their circular Fibres, by the compression of the Muscles, and the Viscera, and the inspired air. All which compressions would not suffice, were not Valves placed commodiously within the Veins, by which the motion of the bloud is accelerated, and a farther conquassation of it made.
And here we meet with a fair occasion to reflect upon the mutual Anastomôses of the Capillary Veins, and the infrequent distribution of Valves in one and the same Vein: for both these contribute also their proportions toward the end now under our disquisition. For, the texture of the Veins being indeed lax and soft, yet such as may by virtue of their circular Fibres be constringed and contracted: hence it is, that by the bloud regurgitating in those tracts of the Veins, that have no Valves, by the great quantity and force of its regurgitation or recoiling, the lowest part of the Vein is much dilated; and on the contrary the highest part is contracted: So that the bloud being by this reflux, though inobservable, agitated and conquassated, may revive its due commistion, and conserve its vital constitution. It appears then, the defect of Valves also hath its use. Within the cavities of the Arteries (as I said before) no Valves are placed, because the grand force, by which the bloud is impell'd through them, is more than sufficient to conquassate and commix it, by wedging in as it were the more fluid albugineous particles among the red grumose particles, that from both sorts comixt per minimas moleculas (as they say) and yet mutually reluctant, the Vital Mication, or Oscillatory intestine motion of the bloud may be continued. So then here is neither need of, nor place for a Fermentation. Now from the consideration of these things premised, I conclude, that the Circulation of the Bloud was instituted for the conservation of its requisite temper and vital constitution: Which was to be inquired, and which leads us to
The admirable effects and benefits arising to the Animal Oeconomy from the same Velocity of the Circulation of the Bloud;
Which being certainly so great, that the whole mass of bloud runs its circular race in the twentieth part of an hour, or thereabouts, even in a sedentary and sedate man; as hath by many been demonstrated from the quantity of bloud commonly contein'd in the body, from the number of Pulses made in an hour, and from the quantity of bloud exprest by every pulse of the heart: and we having already seen what advantage redounds to the bloud it self from this velocity: our curiosity spurs us on to enquire also, what other scopes or ends Nature may probably be conceived to have proposed to herself, when she instituted this so rapid motion; or what emoluments and benefits from thence redound to the Oeconomy of the whole body.
Of these the first seems to be this, that in every pulsation of the heart, a great quantity of bloud is effused and protruded out of the Capillary Arteries into the habit of the parts, for their refocillation by influent life (of which I have formerly discoursed copiosely in this place.) For, by how much swifter the motion of any liquor or other fluid through a pipe or canale is, so much a greater quantity of it is, in equal time, effused at the Orifice thereof; as hath been ingeniously demonstrated by B. Castellus: (Lib. de aqua fluxu.) and therefore the bloud is, like a full and rapid torrent, impelled into the Pores of the flesh and Viscera.
The second is the energy of the stroke, with which the bloud projected by the heart, dashes against the same extreme parts: which energy is composed of the degree of velocity, and of the quantity of bloud impulsed, as that excellent Mathematician Jo. Alphonsus Borellus hath fully demonstrated. (Tract. de vi percussion. Cord. prop. 28.) By this stroke it is, that the newly emptied and conniving porosities of the Muscles and Viscera are forced open and replenished with the impulsed bloud, that communicates to them vital heat and fresh vigor: and that the torpid, useless, and excrementitious particles there remaining, are protruded and expelled, partly through the pores of the skin, partly through vessels destined to their transportation and expulsion. So that by this rapid rushing in of the bloud, nature attains to not only a reviving of the solid parts of the body, but also to the expurgation of the bloud it self from its unprofitable and excrementitious parts, in the Emunctories ordained for that office.
A third advantage is, that by the same rapid velocity of the bloud, and its vehement intrusion into the narrow meatus of the parts; the current thereof dislodges, rinses away, and carries with it many other amoveable particles of various kinds, Saline, Sulphureous, &c. principally the reliques of the nutritive and nervose juices brought thither from the brain; which though unprofitable now to the refection and invigoration of the parts in which they were left, may yet be of some use to recruit and conserve the Crasis of the bloud, and to expedite the secretion of its excrements. This artifice of nature we may more easily comprehend, by observing, that the foreign particles now mentioned are extricated and rinsed away by the bloud, not in ample vessels, but after the egress of the bloud out of the Capillary Arteries, in the intermediate spaces betwixt them and the Capillary Veins, where end innumerable small Canales, some of which bring in the nutritive and nervose liquors, others export the superfluous and less profitable particles of them; which small pipes are, like the Capillary roots of plants, almost every where disseminated into the fleshy parts, into the Viscera, and (most frequently) into the glandules. And this seems to be done, to the end that so many particles of these spiritual and noble juices, being rinsed away by and commixt with the bloud, may advance and conserve the due consistence and constitution of it.
Now of these three considerable benefits, no one seems to me possible to be attained otherwise than by the perpetual and rapid motion of the bloud. Wherefore I am not destitute of a rational ground to support my conjecture, that for these ends Nature thought fit to institute the swift motion of the bloud in its Circulation.  
But what may we conceive to be the reason that induced Her to institute also so multiplied a repetition of this course of the bloud through the same ways?
A River, we know, though the water be in a continual flux, is yet still the same river, because the elapsed parts are continually succeeded by new waters coming on with the same degree of speed to supply it. But to maintain this perpetual succession and supply, upon which the identity of the river necessarily depends, there is required, either an immense quantity of waters from a spring to feed the current, or the same elapsed water must be brought back again to the fountain whence it flowed, that so by perpetually reiterated circuitions the course of the river may be conserved, which otherwise would soon fail and cease.
We are then no longer to admire that Nature, having designed to bring the river of bloud with a most rapid course through the whole body of an Animal, for the various ends above explained; and resolved to make that course perpetual, during the life of the Animal: made use of the same expedient, viz. to repete the circuition of the same bloud without intermission. For the whole mass of bloud commonly found in the body of a man, not exceding 20 pints; and that quantity not sufficing to maintain the course above 5 or 6 first minutes of an hour: lest the current might cease, and so life also fail, it was necessary that the circulation of the same mass of bloud should be continually reiterated, for the conservation of life.
Besides this necessity, there are many admirable uses and advantages which Nature brings to an Animal, by often repeating the period of the circuition of the bloud through the same ways. For if the Circulation were not in this manner reiterated, the bloud could not be defaecated from it biliose excrement in the Liver, nor (according to the vulgar opinion) from the matter of Urine in the Kidneys; nor could either the Chyle be commixt with the bloud in the heart, or the Lympha be brought to temper and dilute it in the Veins: nor could various other operations necessary to the Animal oeconomy be performed. All which it were not difficult for me to deduce from this repeted circuition of the Bloud, if the shortness of the time appointed to me for the administration of my present province, did not oblige me to pass by all collateral disquisitions, and to peruse my principal Theme, the Motion of the Bloud. From the final causes of which I will therefore in a direct order procede to the Efficient.  


