MERLINVS ANGLICVS JUNJOR: The English Merlin revived; OR, His prediction upon the affaires of the English Common-wealth, and of all or most Kingdomes of Christendome this present Yeare, 1644.
------
By W.L.
------
------
Published according to Order.
------
LONDON; Printed by R.W. for T.V. and are to be sold by I.S. in Little Britaine. 1644.
To the Reader.
IN Christmas last past, I was intreated by some friends to write my judgement upon this yeares Actions, 1644. the 6. of January I finished it; since which time divers Coppies have been obtained from me; insomuch, that fearing some Copy might surreptitiously be printed: I have given leave to a Friend for this Impression. And whereas there are some months elapsed since its first writing, they that have any of my former Copies may perceive thereby, whether any materiall accidents have happened, as by me predicted, and then expect the same verity from the succeeding Months, sith all the judgement was drawne from the same fountaine of Learning. If this finde entertainement, thou mayest expect my Astrologicall Treatise of the ninth lesser Conjunction of Saturne and Iupiter 1642.1643. which hitherto is not handled to any purpose by any man, or to the credit of Astrology; I am therein copious, and deliver to the world what I conceive of these our domestique Wars; when we may expect an end of them; what I conceive of most Nations of Europe; there I handle the effects of the remainder of influence of the last Comet in 1618. the cause of these Wars from the heavenly Constellations, as also the nine Conjunctions of Saturne and Iupiter in the watery Trygon, beginning in the time of Henry the sixth; as also the Conjunction of Saturne and Iupiter upon entrance of the fiery Trygon 1603. and since: If that Tractate please, I have also almost finished, The Government of the World by the seven Planetary Angels under the severall Trygonicall Revolutions of Saturne and Iupiter, even to this yeare, from the beginning of the world. If any Astrologer of this or any other Nation, carpe at any judgement in the subsequent Discourse, I offer to maintaine against one or all the verity thereof, according to the fundamentals of Astrology: and I shall take it as an especiall favour but to receive the precise dayes of the month of any materiall accident from any well wishing Gentleman or Souldier; the better to rectifie my judgement another time: And I desire all English and Scottish generous Spirits to passe by the errours and failings of this maiden Worke (for errour there will be) so shall you engage little Merline, who is not ashamed that his name isWilliam Lilly.At the three Flower de Luces neere Somerset House, 1644.
To any, or every man.
I Desire to be modestly and Christianly censured for writing this subsequent discourse: Non quod falsa hominum judicia verear, sed ne quis nimium credulus obloquentium dictis ignorans de nobis scandalum sumat; omnis enim quae scire unquam professus sum, cum Deo, & sine injuria fidei nostrae Christianae scio, & judicatus sum; licet ex mutis paucissimi queant inveniri, qui mysteria occultarum influentiarum Coelestium intelligant.
Its far from my thoughts that there's any binding or inevitable necessity in what I predict by the radiation of heavenly bodies; the stars have no such unlimited lawes, they are bounded, and give light to us or some small glimpses of the great affaires God intends upon earth, but if we rely on our judgement, without relation to the immediate rule and direction of his eternall providence, alas, how soone of wise men we become errant fooles and Ideots: I have ever loathed fatall necessity, supposed by Plotinus to be maintained by Ptolomey; certainly I do not remember any Astrologicall, writer either Arabian, Greek, Jew, or Latine that maintaines such an Atheisticall opinion. God created the heavens, Sun, Moone, fixed stars for the benefit of man, and his own glory: If the Heathens, the Caldeans, Syrians, or some absurd Indians, and Egyptians abused this knowledge, and these Celestiall creatures; shall we Christians suffer, which modestly use, but no way abuse either the Planets or their influence. We use the light of the Sun beames, we make the Sun no God, no incense do we offer; the Moone lights our wandrings in the night, and we are thankefull to God for it; by helpe of fixed stars we saile and performe many admirable secrets: By day I understand knowledge, by night ignorance: Jacob understood by the Sun himselfe, being Master of the Family, by the Moone his wife; by the II. fixed stars a multitude, &c. This learning is ancient, and hath had society with Kings; its now despicable, it hath few favourers, and as few that understand it. I desire to be judged by those that apprehend something in Astrology, and not by the censorious criticall Asse, that beleeves no influence, scarce a heaven: It was folly in me to judge of any science, I was never acquainted with; hee's as much foole as Phormio that censures my labour, and knowes not what I write of, nor the principles of that Art from which I draw my judgement; I beleeve God rules all by his divine Providence, and that the Stars by his permission are instruments whereby many contingent events may be foreseene as well in the generall accidents of the world as in particular mens fates, yet so, as, Astra nullum imperium in mentes eorum habent, qui spiritu ambulant consitente dominum Jesum Christum omnia in sua potestate habentem,
The discourse hath already found some friends, it must now expect as many enemies; I care not, I have avoided almost the termes of Art, that it might appear plaine and easie to the meanest; some things in my Copy the Licenser expunged, its thereby lesse significant: I am contended; it might have appeared in better termes four moneths sooner, had I intended to print it. I conclude with that of Saint Augustine, Deus regit inferiora per superiora: The Planets and Stars are ministers not masters: Expect not that all accidents shall precisely happen to a day or a weeke, do not we first fit the ground, then sow, and after some expiration of time gather a crop: its impossible for the weakenesse of man at all times to hit the certaine day, or weeke of many accidents, sometimes we do, or very near, but not constantly: God keepes and reserves to himselfe many secrets, of which man hath no knowledge; he alters and changes times, seasons, and what he pleaseth, when, and where he will, so that we predict nothing but with this limitation, the hand of Almighty God considered or not impediting or preventing nature, for in his alone breast is all learning, science, knowledge, power and dominion for ever and ever.
To whom, &c. W.L.
------
In some Copies the Reader is desired to correct the Errata following: 
 
 needed only because of P3 bug -->
The signification of the 12 houses of heaven in an Annuall Revolution, by which every one is directed to the key of the Booke.
The following paragraphs (up to 12.) are the inscriptions of the houses of heaven-->
1. Ascendant, commonalty, Vulgar, life of every man.
2. Wealth, Riches, Estate, Movable goods.
3. Kindred, Neighbours, Small journies.
4. Fathers, Towns, Castles, Kings, wives.
5. Children, Embassadours, Commissioners.
6. Servants, Little cattle, Sicknesse.
7. Women, Warres, Law suits, Suitors.
8. Death, Inheritance.
9. Clergy men, Long journies, Religion.
10. Kings, Emperors, Princes, Generals, Commanders of Armies.
11. Friends in generall, servants in particular, their aide, or helpers.
12. Whispering, Great cattle, Envy, Sorcery.
Figure of the houses of heaven

When I speake of the tenth house, I intend somewhat of Kings, or persons represented by that house, which is also called Medium Coelio, the mid heaven: When mention is made of the first house, Ascendant or Horoscope, I intend the Commonalty in generall.
In ictu radii exurgent aequora, & pulvis veterum renovabitur.
Dic: Et eris magnus Apollo.
Pensa librae ex obliquo pendebunt, donec aries recurva cornua supponat.
Londinum Angliae.
Fullpage astrological figure

THE ACCIDENTS BELONGING In particular to England, and generally to many Countreys of Europe:  Astrologically handled for this present yeare 1644. By W.L.
I Intermedle not with discoursing (in quo orbe magno sumus) or what Signe or Planet doth governe in that great Orbe, nor who is Divisor, or what Signe is profectionall of every Orbe; a taske too hard, and not to be performed in a Pamphlet: Nor doe I speake any thing in this Discourse of the Conjunction of  Saturne and Jupiter 1642/3 (Permutatio Saturni & Iovis de triplicitate in triplicitatem, mutationem significat regnorum & Sectarum, Escuid. fol. 15. The permutation of Saturne and Iupiter out of one triplicity into another, signifies a change of Kingdomes and Sects.) nor of any precedent Eclipse, either Solar or Lunar; nor of the influence of the last Comet we beheld in 1618. which is now strongly in operation in all or most places of this Kingdome; I hold my selfe meerely to the Ingresse of the Sun into the first point of Aries, and according to that little knowledge I have, send out into the world these ensuing lines.
Seeing fixed Signes possesse the Angles of the figure, at the time of the Sun his entrance into the Ram, I hold the positure of heaven erected for that moment of time sufficient whereupon to ground my succeeding judgment for the whole yeare, I am warranted in so doing by Guido Bonatus, fol. 527. Quando Sol intrat Arietem, si ascendens est signum fixum, illa revolutio continet in se omnes quartas illius anni: This is also the opinion of some that have Commented upon Ptolomey; but Ptolomey himselfe who meddled not with this manner of judgement, gave direction to erect foure Scheames for every yeare, for discovery of the seasons of the yeare, which hee principally intended; viz. one Figure for the Vernall quarter upon the Sunne his entrance of Aries: the second, upon the Sunnes ingresse into Cancer: the third, upon the Sunnes entrance intoLibra; the fourth, when he entred Capricorne: the former words speake this English; When the Sunne entersAries, if the Signe ascending be fixed, that onely Revolution will serve to judge all the Quarters of the yeare by; of this opinion is Leupoldus in Libro de Revolutionibus; Si ascendens in revolutione est fixum sufficit pro anno toto figura quam fecisti: si est commune fac duas, si est mobile fac quatuor: If the ascendent in a revolution be fixed, it sufficeth for the whole yeare; if common, erect two figures, if moveable, make foure: I conceive more might naturally be deduced from the former position, then is fit to be publiquely knowne to the world.
If the rules of Astrology faile me not, or God Almighty cloud not my understanding, and so make me uncapable of judgement, some more then ordinary action and accidents shall this yeare happen in our Clymate, which is England; and in our neerest adjoyning neighbour Countries, which are Scotland, Ireland, France, Denmarke, the United (perhaps disjoynted) Provinces, as also in the Dominions of his Majesty of Spaine, in Flanders, and Brabant: The Celestiall Scheame it selfe is very strange, all the Angles being fixed, the Moone and Mars in fixed signes; the Sunne, Saturne Venus and Iupiter being all in the Equinoctiall and Cardinall signeAries the ascendant of England, as if by this their position they pointed out wee should have action enough, and variety of it, &c. onely Mercury the father of lyes and untruths, and scandalous Pamplets is in a Common signe, as if he intended all this whole yeare to vex us with flying reports, continuall feares, false alarums, untoward speeches, contradictory newes, lying messengers, and cozening Accomptants, Receivers, Treasurers, and the like, &c.
There doth succeed this ingresse of the Sun, two Conjunctions of Mars with Saturne and Jupiter commonly called lesser Conjunctions; of both which I may occasionally speake, for in their seasons they will instrumentally put forward the actions decreed by Almighty God for this yeare. At the time of the Suns ingresse, I finde the Moone in the tenth house seperated from an opposition of Mars; Accidunt rixae, mali rumores, dolores, mortes, effusiones sanguinis, falsa testimonia: Bethem Apho. 37. The Moone seperated from Mars, we heare of brangling, ill rumours, sadnesse, death, the effusion of blood, false witnesses; she then applies to a trine aspect of Venus and Jupiter, which in the starry language tels us, that from Christmas untill our Lady day, there will be many hot skirmishes, and much bloodshed in those unseasonable times of the yeare, and principally in the  North West parts of this Kingdom. (This was fulfilled by the defeat the two brave Knights, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Sir William Brereton gave to the Irish in the North West of this Kingdom.)
And these stirring actions may be produced, by reason that Saturne and Mars the 12. of January come to a Quadrate aspect, and Mars and Jupiter on the sixt of February: Now if these Quadrate aspects of the three superiors, do in these dirty times stirre up any hostility or action, what will they do about the latter end of May, in June, and July, when they meet in Conjunction? at those times expect to heare of war, slaughter of men, division, Towns besieged, some taken, some plundered, some relieved, &c.
The precedent aspects being in Cardinall signes, shew the actions of this winter to be greater then may easily be conceived, and of greater  concernment then at present we imagine (This I conceive fulfilled by the accesse of the Scottish Army.): yet after some stormes the defluction of the Moone from a malignant Planet and aspect, to a milde fortune by a benigne trine, tels us of a seeming probability or willingnesse to Accomodation of peace (I thinke it was in February a Message came of peace.).
And yet I cannot finde it more then a likelihood of Unity, for the Proposer hereof, or Proposers, the Articles, propositions or the like, which either are or shall be framed, and are signified by Venus, and Jupiter, who behold the tenth house with trine aspect, which is of love and affection: but I say, for as much as neithe Venus or Jupiter do behold the ascendant, which hath signification of the publique State.
I frame this Conjecture, that not onely they that shall frame these propositions, but the  Articles themselves shall have more in them, which may advance the desires of those signified by Medium Coeli, then the good of the people signified by the ascend. (It was so conceived, by many.)
So that although in February, March, April, an May, and part of June, some Propositions or overtures for a peace or Treaty may be made, yet without a miracle all Treaties end in  smoake and vapour (We have found it too true.); for it may be feared the Treaty is brought on to protract time, by those that are signified by the tenth house, that wish not well to the government of this Kingdom, they having hopes of forces from Ireland in April and May, and from France in July and other seasons, also from Denmarke ayde is expected, and from another Prince of lesser fame and quality, and therefore not so much mistrusted.
If any beliefe or Credit is to be attributed to Annuall Revolutions, nothing but  division, dissention, bloodshed, murther, backbiting (Sir Greenfield and others make this good.) treachery, poisoning, distraction, and fraction will be at the Courts of Princes and else where (We all know what distractions here was with the Independants, &c.), each one mistrusting one another, many being faulty, and long ere any be discovered, murmuring secretly each at other, so that it may be feared God hath sent downe into our English Court and Common wealth, that destructive and Martiall Angell, which incited the enemies of God to destroy each other. But let us be sory for what shall exactly see and finde true in this kinde, and endeavour an Union amongst our selves.
There are also this yeare two Solar Eclipses, and they of long duration and great, though not visible in our Horizon; yet in a time of generall distemper they will operate and adde fuell to the fire: The first is in the ninteenth degree of Pisces, neare the Cuspe of the fifth house in the Revolution, where Mercury and Cauda draconis are placed: That may point out the continuance of our Domestique troublesome wars by the subtilty, cunning and plotting of a woman, or women rather; Secretaries, slie knaves, witty and well spoken: Magni prestantisq; viri interritum, latrocinia, et rapinas terrae marique promiscuas minitatur: Proclus, it threatens the death or destruction of some eminent person, thefts and pillaging in a promiscous manner, as well by Sea as by Land. The second Eclipse is in August, in the ninth degree of Virgo: Calamitosum regis alcujus exitum & stragem arguit; famen, pestem, & seditiones mortalium: It argues a Tragicall end and discomfiture of some certaine King, Prince, or great man; and Hunger, Famine, the Plague, sedition or suddaine rising of men, with many miseries I forbeare to relate, cruelty, oppression, inhumanitie of the souldier, and that many Maritime Townes will be in great jeopardie, and sustaine much damage, it points out many sea fights, the death or destruction of some Empresse, Queene, Princesse, noble-woman or the like in our Europeian part of the world. Both the Revolution it selfe and the former Ecclipse acquaint us, that some Embassadour or Embassadours, Agents, Commissioners or the like from forraigne parts will arrive here to negotiate an accomodation, and in conclusion they may be discovered, or it will be doubted and mistrusted, they deale not so candidly as may or might be expected: (Here have since arrived some Embassadours.) And indeed I find this will be a yeare of discoverie of friends from foes; as well at Court as in Common-wealth; a full discovery will be made of one eminent person at Court, and perhaps of an other some where else, that is a starke knave or knaves to the poore kingdome of England: Is not Mercurie Lord of the 11&thsup;. and an assistant to his Majestie at Court: and is not he dissembler enough and traitor besides that hath his significator with cauda draconis. I cannot say this is the man, or these the very men, but I say the most mischievous of all is such a man; one that hath formerly been imployed as Agent, Negotiator, Commissioner, Secretarie, or Embassadour, and is of stature pretty tall, of a swarty, sallow or Sun-burnt complexion, a thin visage and ill countenance, but of a deepe and pestilent understanding, he is not fluent in his speech, but covetous and envious, &c. But sith Mercurie is with Cauda Draconis, and in a double bodied signe, he may represent more then one, or many, one whereof may be a seeming Saint, though really an arch Atheist, one of high stature, big joynted, aged, and yet not much more or less then sixty, one of much outward sobrietie and gravitie, &c. It doth appeare by the trine aspect which Venus and Jupiter and Saturne have to the medium Coeli, and the existence of the Moone in the tenth, that those parties signified by the 10&thsup; house may expect in these their affairs the assistance of three or foure Kings or States, or ayde of men, ammunition and money from so many Countries; but I find not that those forces shall opportunely serve their occasions, or much improve their undertakings, for let us consider both Jupiter and Venus are cadent, and neither of them so dignified; that is so flush, as to spare such considerable supplies as may effect the thing intended; I shall speake more of this in the sequell. Doe not I evidently see, and may not a moderate Astrologer perceive, that their owne domestike servants shall betray them at home, and their correspondents abroad deceive them and falsifie their promises; is not Mercurie their significator peregrine, in detriment and in no support of any planetary aspect. Every Prince or State that intermeddles will be full of feare and suspition, that in assisting such persons as are signified by the M:Coeli, they may plucke an old house over their heads, viz. they may unhappily give libertie to their own subjects to rise in Armes for their just priviledges: But the reason of this judgement is drawne from that Apho. of Cardane in Seg. 2. 187. Conjunctionis locum revolutionem praecedentis, quo in loco ab ascendente fuerit revolutionis annis considera, nam magna evenient juxta domus naturam. Consider the place of the new Moone preceding the Annuall Revolution, and also in what place of heaven it is in from the ascendant, for great matters shall come to passe according to the nature of that house. The Conjunction preceding the Revolution is in the degree neare Mercurie in our Scheame, and he was Lord of the Regall house at time of the conjunction: The Ecclipse it selfe was partly in the seventh house, retarding it's effects the longer, that is, untill May, June and July; but will it end in July? Oh no: then, &c. The position of the Moone in the 10&thsup; house in conjunction with Cor leonis, doth assure us that the greatest State actions of Europe this yeare will be mannaged by a woman or women, or men of feminine deportment and spirit, but as both Venus is peregrine and cadent, and the Moone is afflicted by Mars, out of the 4&thsup; house, and a signe fixed; so either sicknesse, or some casuall accident, afright or amazement, or vengeance from heaven, may prosecute her or them to their graves, and so cause them to finish their dayes in a miserable condition: These women are in part described, one of a haughty masculine spirit and courage, tall and fleshie, fat and faire, of flaxen haire, &c. this is presented by the Moone; The second signified by Venus in Ariete should give the complexion to be browne and ruddie, somewhat obscure, because under the earth, of middle stature, excellent spirit and temper, crosse and wilfull, of a sad browne haire, sickly, because Venus is in detriment and in 6degree decaying in name and fame, because the Sun affords no aspect unto her &c. The third should be signified by Jupiter, or her conditions at least, though he is masculine: A Ladie of goodly proportion clouded in the world, for Jupiter is departing out of Aries into Taurus, where he hath little dignitie, she is freckle faced, and some blemish in one of her fore-teeth, or impediment in her breath, perhaps it stinkes. But now againe I find Mars is absolutely (Dominus Anni) the Moone doth participate, because of her strength and locall being in the tenth house. The signe of Scorpio represents the Commonaltie or vulgar people, Mars and the Moone their Superiours, Governours, Commanders, or better sorts of people. Mars and the Moone are in opposition and in fixed signes, how much doe I feare discord and division in May, June or July, these Planets fore-shew some such thing; God grant no distractions may ever appeare amongst them: More might be said.
This yeare the Sun properly and naturally, doth signifie Soveraignty, Royaltie, Monarches and Monarchies, and in effect all the Kings or the principall Rulers of Europe; for the signe ascending being of long ascensions, we shall scarce find any other ascendant or culminating signe then what we have alreadie in our owne Horizon, though we reduce the Suns ingresse to almost any latitude in Europe. It is true the Moone accidentally hath some signification of majestie. Esse Regum à Sole, Saturno, & Planeta existente in decima. Hermes. Apho. xxiij. Take the signification of Kings or Princes from the Sun, Saturne, and the planet casually posited in the 10&thsup; house. Yet Mars is absolutely strongest for all the yeare, some moneths excepted, words of some concernement, if rightly apprehended, else not to be expounded. But let us make use of our scheame and collect the judgement of our Authors, Aspicies si decima domus fuerit Leo, & utrum tunc Mars aspicit Solem vel decimam, vel si fuerint Sol & Mars corporaliter juncti, tunc inquit timetur interfectio Regis sive Principis cujusdam illo in anno, & si vis scire unde, vide in qua domo Mars est, & ab illa domo est causa sceleris. (Guido. fol. 522.) See if the 10&thsup; house be the signe of Leo, and if Mars behold either the house, or be in conjunction with the Sun, if such a thing or aspect happen, it may be doubted a King or certaine potent Prince will be in danger of killing that yeare; if you will know from whom; see in what house Mars is, and require the cause from thence, &c. Mars is now in the 4&thsup;, Accidet ergo haec illi ab aliquo qui veniet etra terram, viz. this mischiefe shall chance to the King or Prince or great person from one borne in another Country: A good Caveat to Princes must entrust no forraigners with the safeguard of their persons and bodies, the judgement would stretch further, that they arme no forraigne borne Prince for feare of deceit and treacherie: Accidit in puncto quod non speratur in anno: A mischiefe soone happens, when it's effected, no bodie is willing to owne the perpetration. The judgement is not improbable nor what followes immediately grounded upon great reason in Art, because the Sun is going to the conjunction of Saturne; Accidet regi cuidam angustia timebiturá, ne ----- Rex illo in anno; (Guido. fol. 522) Extreme griefe of mind shall infinitely oppresse a Prince this yeare, and it may be doubted some mischiefe may befall the said Prince. He that knows how to apply the rules of Art to judgement, may frame a shreud supposition, let him consider what Saturne is naturally, what house he is Lord of, and in what house he is posited. The truth is, either a Ladie, Embassadour, or great Commander shall wonderfully torment som Europeian Prince; or with their Councels united shall bring abundance of reluctancy to some person of Regall discent: Some ill newes may come to those Princes that have children, concerning either the death, sicknesse, or some dire accident to one or more of them; the same that I say to Kings, Princes or Dukes, I say to Earles and other great Gentlemen, in a time of generall infelicity, what eyes hath the bullet of a musket or Cannon, or the edge of a cutting sharpe sword. I must ingeniously confesse the positure of heaven is averse to Monarchy, nor doth it flatter the Commonalty: both shall suffer and smart: a happie peace were much to be desired, for si Mars in revolutione Anni in Angulo, & aspexerit ascendens, significat sanguinem, & gravius, & in omni terra in cujus signo fuerit ejus lumen, vel oppositio vel quartus aspectus: (Guido. fol. 521.) If Mars in the revolution of a yeare be in an angle, he signifies bloud shed and to purpose, and in every countrey to which he casteth his quadrate or opposite aspect, or to the country subject to the signe he possesseth at that moment of the revolution. If this prove true, my judgement must faile, if Italy this yeare be not in some broyles, Valachia magna, Muscovia, Transilvania, Swethland, Westphalia, Bavaria, Piemont, some countries that lie neare the Alpes, Apulia, Gallia togata; some part of Greece and Turkie, Polonia magna, Lorraine, a great part of Germanie, Ireland, although Iupiter passe through Taurus; France will hardly be excused, or Denmarke stand for a cypher: A proper goodly Noble-man of red or flaxen haire will vex or disturbe the North or North-west or West of Scotland, and perhaps some others the South. (I heare some such thing hath hapned.) But those active gallants must beware: I meddle not with Portingall whose King I much honour; he's like to keepe what he hath: Nor with some Cities of Holland and Zealand, who may perhaps have cause to murmurre ere the Sunne againe returne to Aries, 1645. I write cordially, I will flatter no Nation or people: what art informes I must write; I say there will be fraction and faction, not onely and altogether at or in the Courts of Princes, but in their countries and dominions amongst their Subjects and meaner people: Rome and Venice looke to it carefully, is there no treason hatching against you, no private counsell to plunge both cities in warre, either this Pope Barbarino, or some magnificent Clergy-man will be in danger of death this yeare; why not made away in a tumult or strangled. Let not the Aurangian Family thinke it selfe excluded this yeare, from perturbation, mistrust, jealousie; if from further mischiefe. (Guido. fol. 552.) Catalonia and Norway are subject to Scorpie, ergo, &c. Si Mars fuerit corporaliter junctus Saturno (as the last day of May you may find them) significat diminutionem status divitum ac magnatum & malè se habebunt invicem cives illius Regionis, & pauca erit inter eos pietas & misericordia. (Guido. fol. 552.) When in a yeare you find Mars corporally joyned to Saturne, the wealth of the Nobilitie and of great persons is extreamely impoverished, the Citizens generally of the Region have much adoe, small is the charity or mercie which men use one towards another: Si Mars sit junctus Saturno, significat bellum & effusionem sanguinis, & multitudinem febrium, & etiam quartanas febres, & pestilentias in partibus orientalibus & significat juvenes & quod cadet inter divites & magnates Guerrae atq mutua interfectio ex ferro. If Mars be joyned to Saturne, he premonisheth of Warrs to ensue, and the effusion of Christian bloud, many violent Feavers of all kinds, quartan Agues, pestilence in the East-parts, and that the Nobilitie and great men of Gentry shall fall at division amongst themselves, and one kill or destroy another: When could these rules have been more aptly applyed, then in these distempered times; the cause or provocation which now incites to kill, was formerly in a time of peace concluded in wrangling words, in this sence understand me.
Mars in revolutione in signo aerio significat injurias, So saith Messahalah lib.1. cap. 45. Mars in the revolution of a yeare in an aery signe foreshews injury oppression and tyranny: which is confirmed by Hispalensis, Mars in signo humanae figurae erunt bella, sanguinis effusiones, mortes ense vel igne; Mars as now posited, doth portend shedding of blood by sword and fire &c. The reason hereof I conceive to bee, because aery signes produce words and winde, which usually provoke men to further quarrell. There are some conceive and that rationally that Saturnus being Lord of the third and combust, doth stirr up a multitude of theeves and high-way robbers. Intrabit districtio et Angustia super nobiles; (Guido. fol. 555.) Distresse, sorrow, and anguish of mind shall terrifie the Nobilitie and Gentry of this and other Kingdomes. So many Axiomes and Aphorismes of the learned against the Gentry and Nobility, doth seeme exceedingly to stirr up many afflictions unto them in their estates, fortunes and persons; Caution is good; wee can never bee too wise, especially in a troublesome time. Be things as they may, Si Saturnus fuerit in quinta, significat abortivos illo in anno plus solito, et detrimentum filiorum, et contentiones cum legatis, et nuntiis, et quod ipsi non bene perficient quod sua interest. Guido. Fol.562.
Saturne in the fift house causeth more abortives then usually have been, the destructions of many mens sons or children, much tergiversation with Embassadours and forraigne Agents, and that they performe not what may bee expected from them: Let our State see to this if any Embassadours come over unto us this yeare, and let people be carefull of their children, and midwives of women in travell. The more I behold the heavens, the greater mischiefe do I feare; but knowing God can in a moment reconcile us, I am more sparing in Art; yet let none take it ill I predict what I do upon the positive rules thereof. But sith Saturnus and Mars come the first time to a meeting since the ninth lesser Conjunction of Saturne and Iupiter, 1642/3. now in this present yeare, and in the sixt house of heaven, here may be some especiall notice taken of it, for according to the immediate action depending on this little or lesser  Conjunction (This conjunction is the last day of May.), you shall, I say, see wonderfull alterations to succeede; Some would imagine, because it fals in the sixt house, that it should signifie extreme sicknesses, much destruction to mankinde, &c. without good consideration, it may puzzle an easie judgement: my opinion is thus, that as both Iupiter and Venus in figura Mundi were by place in the sixt house, so their benevolent presence may and will diminish the malitious influence of the two infortunes, especially if that Aphorisme be true, Quicquid ligat Saturnus, solvit Iupiter; quicquid ligat Mars, solvit Venus: (Almans. prop. 36.) Iupiter cures where Saturne hurts, and Venus where Mars; and this is true in any magicall naturall conclusion.
It is true, the Conjunction succeedes the Worlds figure, and yet I conceive it shall produce no such plague or fearefull diseases as some have dreamed; it may produce great weaknesse in peoples fights; the head-ach more then ordinary, and stoppings at the brest, and much slimy fleagme in the throat, but that it should shew a sicknesse, I meane a plague generally, I cannot fore-see: for Mars being in his owne house, hath great dominion of Saturne, and if we beleeve Almansor proposit 7degree. (The conjunction of these two planets, doth cause suddaine stormes, hail, thunder, tempests, &c.) Quando duae conjunguntur infortunae, sit ex eis fortuna perfecta. The Conjunction of the two infortunes, becomes a fortune. It must be warily understood, some evill they will doe, but not so much as otherwayes they would, had neither of them been well dignified. But because Aries is a beastiall signe, and the Conjunction is in the sixth House, I conceive it imports much stirring and preparation to Action in a Military way; and causeth the Souldier to desire fight and service, and for that Mars is Lord of the ascendant in figura Mundi, and Saturne of the fourth, which signifieth Townes, Castles, Forts, &c. neare upon the time of the Conjunction or in Iune. A Towne will be taken by those that had Mars their significators in the worlds figure, &c. it tels us of detriment, hinderance, losse, consumption and destruction of foure-footed beasts, both greater and smaller, and especially of those are most usefull for man, as the Oxe, the Horse, Cow, Asse, the Hog, Sheepe, Deere, Conny, &c. it threatens mens servants male and female, young and old. By which it appeares how great losse and dammage the industrious Countrey-Farmer and Husbandman shall sustaine, by loosing, and the taking away of such goods and servants as are most usefull for him. But shall the Countrey Farmer, or day-labourer loose all, it is said by some, that Iupiter in Ariete, &c. threatens and points out Nobles, Judges, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Bishops, Deanes, Clergy-men in generall, Doctors, Proctors, Atturneyes, Phisitions, Surgeons, some Commanders in Chiefe, of all sorts of men and Citizens some, or many of every kinde shall participate in this generall losse, either in their persons or fortunes, and of this let every Reader be sure, &c. In many parts of this Kingdome it shall come to passe one neighbour shall be very carefull to preserve somewhat for another, but it shall so fall out, he that indeavours preservation for his neighbour shall in the meane time runne the hazard of loosing his owne, so much oppression and inhumanity shall in probability fall upon us this yeare. Video paucitatem substantiarum & curiositatis inter magnates; (Guido. fol. 565.) I judge the Nobility and Gentry shall not be so flush of money as to buy bables and trifles: the pressing Calamities of this yeare may be so extreme, God grant them money to furnish themselves with bread and necessary Conveniences: Let Punctillos alone. These Arabicall Conclusions may this yeare be well verified, the times considered; for sith all the Angles are fixed, and the Moone and Mars strong in Angles, the Chelae in the ascendant, and Cor Leonis in the tenth, the Sun impedited of Saturnus; Iupiter and Venus weake and cadent; I see no probability of concluding any peace this yeare; I am of opinion there will be strong action and warre all this whole yeare, and that there will be fighting enough and too much. Let me be pardoned: feci: I assure you there's a mysterie, who is he can tell it? But Astrologers use to say, when Mars is in the fourth house, and in a house of Saturnus, Significat exspoliationem mortuorum positorum in sepulchris & suffossionem parietum & ablationem aliarum rerum per modum latrocinii; significat exercitium hominum in lucrando & extorquendo pecuniam undecung, poterunt per modum dominationis non licitae, per falsas attestationes, & per verba malitiosa, & patientur homines pericula & tribulationes. (Guido. fol. 570.) viz. we may justly feare in this ensuing yeare, the robbing, spoiling and defacing of the sepulchers or monuments of the deceased, the undermining and breaking or demolishing of stone wals and buildings; the unruly taking away of other mens goods by way of filching, theevery and shirking, we also foresee a kind of trade amongst men in getting and extorting moneys per fas & nefas, after a domineering fashion or commanding way altogether illegall, by false informations and suggestions of evill words, by which meanes men shall suffer infinite dammage, tribulation, and other personall afflictions, &c. If Mars be in the fourth house, much death followes by sword and sicknesse, and these beginnings may be or begin in the North and end in the South; & hoc crede mihi est valdè timendum. Nor shall the South West and West escape without plenty of bloudshed, poverty, and plundering, &c. (Guido. fol. 573.) Crede. Si Mars fuerit in Aquario (as he now is) significat gravitates atq tribulationes venturas hominibus, & abundabunt nives, & pluviae, & frigus in suo tempore, sive suis temporibus, & minuetur Annona & vinum atq butyrum in partibus occidentalibus, & in terra quae dicitur negotiatorum, & significat mortem sive mutationem regis sive dominatoris illius regionis in qua tu revolveris annum. If Mars be in Aquarius, he portends grievous afflictions and tribulations shall come upon men, and that snow, raine and cold shall abound in their seasons, there shall be great scarcitie of provision for man and beast, as also of Butter and the like in those Westerne parts from whence it was formerly transported by the Merchant; either the death of the King of that Countrey where you set that revolution is to be feared, or some mutation of principall Governour; we have now many severall Governours, let there be a change of twenty, so that God blesse our Soveraigne Charles King of England, which I hope he will, and indeed the Arabians, whose words these are, had in every their severall Countries a petty King, so that the words might almost annually be fulfilled amongst them, or once in three yeares; but I see not how it can have relation to our Kings in Europe in the strictnesse of the letter: it may threaten some casualty in my opinion, or some suddaine amasement or fright to some Europeian King, Prince, or the like, &c. There will be a sensible alteration in many mens estates by reason of their children; let it be understood rightly, and the Sun shall not the second time run into or thorough Aries ere children and kindred act their parts and that to purpose, &c. and in truth the Sun in the fifth impedited of Saturne sheweth this. I must now fall upon a necessary people signified to the world by Mercury, who represents Secretaries, Scribes and Clerks of all sorts (& à consiliis regum) as also Messengers, Agents, Trumpetters, but above all Accomptants, Treasurers, Receivers of money publike and private, but whether any of these be really honest, I matter not; there are many of these shall receive this yeare a just sentence for their cozening, cheating, and corrupt accounts, and for shirking the Common-wealth and State. Above all observe that Mercury is in the house of Iupiter, this tels me a spade is a spade, viz. that the  greatest Professour makes not alwayes the truest accounts (This I mean of those that under pretence of Religion, get fat places, but have no honesty to use them, whereby the State suffers.): Me thinkes I see them in Iuly, August, September, and October quake, and pray that God might send some Angell to take their accounts. Let me prophetically tell these Accomptants, our State will narrowly sift out their knavery, though most cunningly under the vaile of Religion they would shuffle off all calling to question, untill doomes day: As long as ye live trust none of those that prolong time: Latet anguis in herba: I love the honest man but hate the knave. Had not the Starres given me tongue and judgement, I had been silent. Altercationes verborum toto hoc anno inter homines plus solito. (Guido.) More words jangling and wrangling then matter all this whole yeare, but to little purpose, unlesse to prolong our disturbances, which as yet are not come to their height.
But let us come neerer home, and I hope without offence, seeing I finde the Moone in the tenth house neare Conjunction of the noble Star Basilicus in Tryne to Iupiter and Venus, I do collect Astrologically that those signified by the tenth house, by their Agents or Embassadours shall obtain assistance and supply from some Countries lying Eastward and Southward, and also from other parts, I meane, beyond the Sea: But if my judgement be not muddy, (Some say that the valiant Swanley hath effected part of this upon the Irish.) Mars who represents the Commonalty, their Officers, Sea-men, Ships, &c. being in opposition to the Moone, who represents the ships that shall transport that assistance, I say its probable, the Publique Ships or Souldiers belonging to the Common-wealth shall meet with part of the Ammunition, men, and money, and either sinke or take them; perhaps ship-wrack may cast away some, &c.
Questionlesse, because  Iupiter and Venus do both behold the Moon in the tenth house, and the Mid-heaven it selfe; Divers States, Kings, or Princes, and Princesses (because of the Moone in the tenth) living East and South from London will endeavour an Assistance all they can. But all their significators the Moone excepted are ill placed, whereby it may be knowne some would, but cannot; others will casually finde impediment, so that few will performe so much assistance as is and will be requisite for the enterprise in hand; and yet aide will come, for the Moone will performe it.
Here's much matter to be performed this yeare, its no sleepie or drowsie time; Cum Luna in nocte fuerit in decima, significat effectum rerum ex parte regis & mulierum, & erit hoc citò, sed res in utrisq temporibus non erit durabilis. (Guido. fol. 388.) When the Moone by night is in the tenth house, Kings shall have their desires performed by the sollicitation of women, and that suddenly, but what they act either by day or night, shall be of no continuance; From which it may be collected, that the Queens or great Ladies or Europe shall mannage the most materiall affaires of this yeare, and lend or send support to those whom they thinke are wanting thereof. But as the mindes of men are variable, I feare many shall finde the Resolutions of great Ladies this yeare more mutable.
What shall I say, its probable that in Iune, Iuly, or August, men, ammunition, or money may seasonably come to those that want it. Every planet hath some signification in one kinde or other, so hath the Dragons head and taile, though they are no planets but Nodes. Caput in Virgine, destructionem messium & caeterarum frugum, & paucitatem omnium verum quae metuntur, & casum vermium in arboribus & destructionem eorum quae remanserint à prima destructione, etiam postquam fuerint reposita in locis in quibus credentur salvari sive custodiri. (Guido. fol. 590.) Caput in an Annuall revolution in Virgine tels us of the destruction of our harvest and others fruits, and much scarcitie of such commodities as are sold by measure, that Vermine and Caterpillers shall consume our fruits and abound on the trees, and what the Caterpiller leaves at one time, another sort of destructive creature will spoile at another: as also the losse, spoiling and wast of that corne, fruit or other graine which men have stored up in such places as formerly gave safety to their Commodities; so that little securitie is likely to be in our Chambers for houshold-stuffe or goods, as little in our barnes for our corn, and the like uncertainty in our Store-houses for necessary provision, or in our ware-houses for fruit and other Commodities. Cauda draconis saith, the souldier shall extend his power and rule over his Prince or Commander, and that many gallant and brave fellowes called Gentlemen and Noblemen will shift their habitations and dwellings to avoide the sentence and punishment due unto them for offences committed, and especially for feare of imprisonment, which they extremely desire to avoide: there will be also much babling, many provocations and words to stirre up new Sects and Ceremonies in Religion, so that it seemes here will be worke enough; generally Cauda draconis in the fift, Tristabuntur homines causa filiorum, & quod portabunt homines sua vestimenta vetera.  Guido, fol. 595. Men shall be extremely perplexed for losse of their sons and children, and many men shall be so put to it, they will be inforced to runne away with old clothes; Let me not live if Guido was not in this a very Prophet, for omitting the impoverishment of many by the Souldier, very many besides by reason of infinite taxes and pressures have made no new Clothes a long time, if it happen these to run, they must necessarily trudge with old clothes. Bella excitat Mars si fuerit in Revolutione anni in Angulo figurae Coeli quocunque. Leupoldus, lib. 5. de Revo. Mars in any Angle in figura Mundi, or yeares Revolution, excites mens mindes to war and contention; you must understand, if in a time of peace he be so posited, he provokes men to much law suit, the Nobility to private Duels, the Gentry to envie and siding one against another: the Countrey Farmer to many unjust molestations, one towne against another: For as raine in Summer though it descend in good quantity, doth not then by reason of the drinesse of the ground, presently cause a floud; so neither in a peaceable time doth Mars operate more then I have said, but now in an outragious time and of warre it selfe, we must take the words literally; But if the same Authour speake truth, Victor erit, &c.  He shall be Victor or overcome, who, &c. Si Saturnus fuerit vel in quadrato, oppositione vel conjunctione Solis, Regibus significat damna & infirmitates quae accident in hominibus & in substantiis eorum, sed si Mars fuerit in quarto & humano signo, accidet in hominibus effusiones multi sanguinis & litium, & bellorum, & erit generale, & erit fortius in fine Anni. Haly, 362. fol. If Saturne be either in Conjunction, square or opposition to the Sun, he demonstrates much sufferings unto Kings or great Princes in their fortune and worldly estate, but if Mars be in the fourth, and in a humane signe, there will happen to men much slaughter, many warres and controversies, and these calamities or misfortunes shall be generall, and most forcible towards the latter end of the yeare. What Part of England this present sixth of January, 1644. is free or cleare from one oppression or other, ere the latter end of the yeare, my heart trembles to thinke what shall happen in the West parts of this Kingdome; for as Mars in Geminis the last yeare afflicted that Country and Confines, so doe I much more feare him this yeare by reason of his positure in Aquarius, so that I doubt he may oppresse their maritime or Sea-Townes to purpose, their fertile grounds and pleasant meadowes. The Souldier will devoure and consume their stately houses and principall Palaces, fire, warre, and the Canon may exspoliate, &c. Let us looke to Dunkirke, and it to its selfe: yet let us not slight those English coasts that lye towards the coasts of Normandy: Its not probable any Army shall enter the East and South-East parts of this Kingdome, though at severall times such a thing may be endevoured. Those counties beyond Trent where the Elevation of the Pole is more than 54. are like to be the Tennis-ball of fortune harbouring both friends and enemies at one time, yet at length, if division hinder not, the enemy is beaten into a narrow compasse. August will informe you more, September and October very much; Iune and Iuly will have plentifull action, &c. If no Authours had charactered this yeare for such a blacke one, my own experience, though but small, would have made me doubt some terrible fate to be neer approaching. For upon perusall of many of my friends Nativities, and upon examination of their Hylegiacall places, I have found most of their Significators to have uncomfortable Promittors in one kind or other, intimating either danger, death, or destruction to their persons, or dammage to their estates and fortunes, all which could not be, if we did not already, and must further suffer under the generall fate now impending over England.
And indeed our sufferings are more sharp and terrible by reason the ascendant of this years revolution is neare the degree of the Comet in 1618 whose operation is now strongly in full force over all England, and is wandring towards the more Northerne Clymates, viz. Scotland, Denmarke, Sweden, Polonia, Russia, &c. but because in my Astrologicall Discourse of the effects of that conjunction of Saturne and Iupiter 1642/3, I am copious, I forbeare further mention. The ascendant of this yeares revolution is the signe culminating at time of that conjunction; it is also the ascendant, when Saturne and Mars meet 31. May: by all which we are forewarned in the heavenly language, how great, how many, how terrible and variable the acts and warres of this yeare shall be: But shall we only suffer, or have the sword onely drawne in our Kingdome? Oh Germanie, Germanie, looke to thy selfe and confines, neighbours and friends in Iuly, August, or September. Be not too confident thou populous France, somewhat is neare thee, &c. Spaine tremble, yet halfe an age, thou hast many enemies; few are thy friends, ten moneths hence, Transilvania will rise and Hungaria fight. The Polonian may goe neare to spoile his quiet and happinesse, &c.
But many will wonder I am so extravagant, or why this yeare I speak so much of warre. I find Mars is Lord of the yeare, Ergo ex intemperato Martis ardore, ac rubrabilis cui praest, vehementi commotione in animis hominum excitantur intemperatae scilicet commotiones, quas incompositae quoque actiones, violentique inconsiderati sequuntur affectus, unde ira, temeritas, &c. and all those doubts and feares which so much oppresse us, and terrifie the fancies of people at this time, so that we cannot believe one another, be the matter projected never so reall. The North-west parts and North-East quarters of this kingdome shall infinitely suffer by our combustions this yeare; in those Countries and in the West, there may be many a fight. But if I understand the Scituation of England aright, the most eminent and materiall grand action or fight may happen not much above 20.miles from Coventry; and yet I confesse there's probability that neare to the City of Bath in the West of England, there may be a mortall combate and a pitch field fought, greatly to the disadvantage of the looser: there's also many other Towns in the West where, and neare unto which places there will be some hot and memorable service. He that carries the day in the first fight, and prosecutes the victorie wisely in the second fight, he I say may say and sing, Actum est; for he may obtaine a Lawrell Garland, &c. Monethly Observations.
Let us heedfully observe what followeth after the conjunction of the Sunne and Saturne the 10&thsup; of March.
(Verified.) Sir Iohn Meldram at Newarke upon Trent, upon the 21. had his defeate: The 29. the honourable Sir William Waller and Sir William Belfore, that resolute brave man, beate the Hoptonians.
Observe the Conjunction of the Sunne and Iupiter the 17. of April, and the actions of the 23,25,26. April.
Her Majestie went from Oxford towards Bristol or Exceter the same day; (Verified.) and that day newes came to London of the Parliaments forces their victorie at Selby; about the 25. of April: Sir Iohn Gell beate Goring in Derbishire. About the 20. day the Scottish  Armie and the Lord Fairfax that brave Lord met.
(Aprill.) If our Armies be neare there will be blowes, or some rascall Irish will land to fight for his Majestie, and the Protestant cause: Some Popish assistance or men, ammunition or mony may come by sea for his Majestie, &c. Irish keepe at home, unlesse you can swallow a Cannon or wade over the Sea.
I am informed certainly that divers Irish have landed this month, whether any ammunition have come, I have not heard, or whether such a destinie follow the Irish; time will manifest. (Verified.)
(May.) In May we have various newes, some good, some bad, report that a great woman is dead: about the middle some overtures, or propositions for peace, or Embassadours, &c. Observe who is in danger the latter end of May upon the conjunction of Saturne and Mars 31. at what time our Armies will be neare the enemie and they us; let the publike Armie take heed of treacherie, mutinie and false information of some Country peasant: Ladies begin to be fearefull after the square of Saturne and Venus, the sextill of Sol and Saturne, some great person goes to looke after his wife. (Whether the Ladyes at Oxford were not frighted upon his Excellencyes approaching to Oxford iudge. The renowned Massy hath been this moneth in many skirmishes: I am perswaded many in Oxford would.) I feare there will be many skirmishes this moneth towards the latter end thereof; let us not be terrified with the first newes, the second may prove better: Oh division and distraction: Some are good for nothing else: Gentlemen and Nobles shift your habitations.
(Iune.) Iune begins with sad newes to some bodie and broken heads: 4&thsup; day an opposition of the Moone to Saturne and Mars, and the quadrature of Saturne and Mercurie, will prove unluckie, opening the way to much mischiefe, fighting and action; some accomptants or publicke Receivers would faine shuffle and protract time, and it brings newes out from the North not very good; presently after comfortable newes. (Lancashires ill fortune at Bolton makes this good.) A King looseth a friend, presently after another State have a losse; some treacherous men or letters are taken or discovered: Some Ammunition or men comming for England may be met with; perhaps feare of a plot: God blesse the London  Army; more aide comes: the latter part of Iune hath action where Armies are neare; Some Army may move Southward, and a generall or principall Commander is either taken prisoner, or in danger, if his horse trot not or be slaine.
(Iuly.) The first weeke in Iuly may prove bloudie enough, and fatall to some great Officer; some more Irish will be jogging for England: A great person fals sick, &c. What comes from the East, and who moves Eastward. Many flying reports of some skirmishing at sea, and aboundance of lying newes in London. Some missives, or thoughts or talke of peace, Iuly 26. there's a conjunction of Iupiter and Mars, neare the degree of the 8. house of the figure of the world (It portends much slaughter and bloudshed.). The Irish may curse their comming; some Agent or Embassadours for treatie. Sudden Commotions, mutinies and many brave Gallants slaine as well noble as others: Judges and Lawyers have ill successe: the precedent conjunction fore-tels a battell or fight; God prevent it: if private division hurt not all is well: the Sextill of the Sunne and Iupiter promiseth assistance from Ireland; and it is the tryne of Iupiter and Venus that moves for some treatie, either by Embassadours or others. As strange newes from forraigne parts, and yet it comforts many.
(August.) The beginning of August is full of frights, fights and amazements, they now may meet that have not a great while; Saturne is Retrograde; Planeta Retrogradus est, ut vir infirmus, stupefactus, sollicitus, Bethem. Aph.2. A Retrograde planet is like a man infirm, amazed carefull; our English Proverb expresseth the words excellently. A man as it were frighted out of his wits: Some bodie growes worse and worse, now some get Townes, Castles and forts, other doe loose whole Countries, 11th day, Iupiter enters Gemini, and the 12th day the Sun and Iupiter meet by quadrate; as the one shewes good to the City of London in my judgement, so the aspect either captives or kils some Commander, A galloping nagge is better then no horse at all. 17. day Venus she is Retrograde, this Retrogradation is a thing against nature; some great Ladie mistrusts her health and safety: an opportune time to question money receivers: good newes is welcome: the barbarous Irish may smart: Ecclipse of the Sun the 21&thsup; day. Some young Commanders must either die or be taken: I wish unitie in the Citie ever. 31. Aug. a square of Mars and the Sun; the Moone carries the light to Saturne: Now motion in the West: A man or a Mouse: more blowes, and Townes surrendred. A fight is likely to be neare some Citie or Towne. God blesse Kings and Princes, Generals of Armies; we may heare some ill newes or messages, who is in danger latter end of August or September.
(September.) September 8th day, Jupiter becomes Retrograde, Nobles and Gentlemen, some Clergie and Lawyers disperse themselves, and find out new places or habitations, we heare some bodie dies or flies; some manner of sicknesse breakes out (not much of the plague) a kind of unknowne disease, lying in the head, eyes, and stomach or brest, women are still crost and vext: there's opposition of Saturne and Mercurie 14. day: much dammage to the Country Farmer in his cattle, corne and commoditie: the Plunderers rove up and downe: if they be questioned (I mean) the publike and private Receivers, they will be found guiltie; be sure to looke to the old; goe to the root, feare not: falsenesse in Clarkes and Secretaries, some private letters opened: an old knave and a fox is found out. The month shews much stirring and action, fighting enough, if not set field. Where fights are, men loose their lives, some shipwracke or strange gales of wind: opposition of Sunne and Saturne, some wicked designe against England: strange weather, all in extreames: and more losse to the Farmer in the West: Venus is direct; and Mars enters Cancer about 27. day: A good gale of wind, and God blesse us.
(October.) The first full Moone in October opens the passage to the last grand opposition of Sol and Saturne: our misery continues: without Gods mercies our sorrowes increase; our men fight some private dissention: Are the Welch mad: I hope no division in Scotland or betwixt us: Let us love, we live; disjoint, both are undone. 8. day Jupiter he enters Taurus by Retrogradation; the Irish mutter, and perhaps are frighted: the tryne of Jupiter and Venus seeme to intend some hopes of accomodation, if not exchange of prisoners: We may feare an Hericano about 27. or 28. Octo. A new Moone in Octo. may endanger some peoples lives at sea, and do mischiefe at land, Tempus periculosum: will not the actions of this new Moone be fatall, it should; it's in the degree ascendant of the yeare, 29. Mars is running madd and must be Retrograde; theeves and high-way men good store; and men run from one place to another: Do not Plunderkins breake into Scotland.
(November) I like not November, what strange weather here is: and yet we cannot be at rest: here's probability that many great persons shall suffer, but whether death or losse of limmes and goods, God onely knows: Men are called to account; Justice must now be done, and rich or poore must answer at the barre of Justice: Some may loose their heads upon opposition of Sol and Jupiter: Great Ladies suffer in health: Mercurie affords variety of false newes, 23. Novemb. or thereabouts. The many aspects of the Planets and they i l, shew some extreame treason, treachery or the like, and some sea towne obtained or surrendred by falsenesse: many blowes where parties are neare, and many men drowned. 
(December.) God be mercifull unto this moneth: upon the opposition of Mars and the Sunne; aboundance of ill weather, and some person or other, souldier or great man may breake his thigh, or his right arme: Many Mercurian Scribes and money Receivers may be still found out and punished; here's old slashing by fits. ---- The yeare ends not our troubles without Gods great mercie. Will there not be much sea fighting this yeare? Who may run away in September or October? What man or City is frighted in December? --- Neare to the times limited by me will the most memorable accidents of this yeare happen, almost a miraculous accident, greater then hath hapned this many a yeare, will either happen in the end of this or beginning of the next. I have been sparing to write any thing of the West of England, the unluckie surrender of Bristol having prolonged our troubles: but as it was unfortunately lost, so it may as opportunely be recovered by a more noble hand: Nor doe I meddle with a principall City or Town that will be in danger of firing; or with some others to be sieged, taken and plundered: I pretermit many judgements which might have set out this discourse, I conclude the whole in few words.
A troubled and divided Court:
An afflicted Kingdome.
A City neare a great plague, yet doe I not find out this to be a yeare of much plague in London; there are many Cities and Townes may precede us in this misfortune, We hasten and make easie passage.
I leave, for I must not.
France may find worke at home: an opportunity is expected.
Scotland must scuffle; matters are not ripe.
Spaine and the noble Austrian Family are sinking, but not totally.
The united Provinces had need of good advice, &c.
Italy will have much adoe to make up breaches.
The Hungarians and Transilvanians will rise in Armes.
Poland may feare, and expect the Tartar.
Russia Wologda will be engaged.
The Swede will have both hands full.
Denmarke, it seemes may remember Tychos prediction.
Ireland will fall into discontent: and Wales will unwillingly be drawne to farther service. Poore Wales.
This is all I have thought fit to commit to print, for this yeare, 1644. here's lesse then I could have delivered, more I durst not, the key is easily found by the judicious: it's no more mine but the worlds, to which I commit it.
FINIS.

