GLOBE NOTES
Per R. H.
1666.

NOTES UPON Both Globes Celestiall and Terrestiall.
First concerning the Celestiall GLOBE.
It is the modell of Heaven, but chiefely of the eight sphere, wherein three things are to be observed in generall.
viz.
1. Definition.
2. Delineations.
3. Use.
1. The Definition.
It is a sphericall body, having a poynt or center in the middest, from whence right lines being extended to the superficies they are all equall.
2. Delineations.
Which are these three,
1. The Lines or Cyrcles.
2. The principall points.
3 The Figures or Constellations.
1. FIrst of the Lines or Circles, every of which are actually or intellectually divided into 360 equall parts called Degrees, the more principle whereof are these tenn, which make up the Sphaera armillaris, six whereof are great circles, as be all those which divide the Globe into two equall parts, or hemispheres, having the same center with the Globe; And the other foure are called smaller cyrcles, because they divide the Globe into two unequall parts or segments.
The 6 great cyrcles are these.
1. The Horizon is that broad cyrcle upon the frame, this divideth the Globe into two hemispheres, the one which we see, is allwaies above the horizon, the other which we see not is below: And on the horizon are drawn divers cyrcles, viz. of the 12 Signes, and of the dayes of the Months, and the 32 winds.
2. The Meridian is the brasse cyrcle which standeth at right angles to the Horizon, and in which the Globe is hanged and turned about on its poles, which are the ends or extremity of the axis of the World, and upon the Meridian, is another little howre cyrcle fastened, with an index moving about upon the Pole.
3. The Equinoctiall is drawn upon the superficies of the Globe, in the middest between the two Poles of the World, and the degrees thereof are numbred with 10, 20, 30, &c. to 360.
4. The Ecliptick line, this cutteth the Equinoctiall in two poynts, and is divided into 12 Signes, each containing 30 degrees, and it passeth in the middest of the Zodiac, for the Zodiac is a broad cyrcle containing 16 degrees in breadth, and is the bounder of the 7 Planets.
5. The Equinoctiall Colure, this cutteth the Equinoctiall at right angles, in the two poynts where the Ecliptick passeth over the same Equinoctiall line, and so passeth through the Poles of the World.
6. The Solsticall Colure, this passeth through the Ecliptick where it toucheth both the Tropicks, and cutteth both the Equinoctial and Ecliptick at right Angles, and passeth through the Poles of the World, where also it cutteth the Equinoctial Coloure at right Angles.
The 4 lesser Cycles are,
1. The two Tropicks, each being parallel to the Equinoctial, and about 23 degrees, and 31 from it. That which is toward the North Pole, is called the Tropick of Cancer; That which is toward the South Pole, is called the Tropick of Capricorne, and these are the bounders of the greatest Declination of the Sun.
2. The two Polar Cyrcles, these are so far distant fromt the Poles of the World, as the Tropicks are from the Equinoctial; That which is next the North Pole, is called the Artick Polar Cyrcle, and that which is next the South Pole, is called the Antartick Polar cyrcle.
There are moreover drawn upon this Globe divers other great Cyrcles passing by the beginning of the twelve Signes, cutting each other in two opposite points, and these with the Solstitial Coloure, divide the Globe into 12 equal parts, and these are called the Cyrcles of the Longitude of Stars.
Also through every point of the Meridian, there are small Cyrcles imagined to be drawn parallel to the Equinoctial, which are called the parallels of Declination of the Sunne and Stars.
Also the like small Cyrcles are imagined to be drawn parallel to the Horizon, and these are called Almicantars, or Cyrcles of Altitude.
The second thing noted in the Delineation, is the Points to be observed on the Globe.
1. THe more principal are these, viz. The two Points on which the Globe is hanged and turned about within the Brazen Meridian, these represent the Poles of the World, from one of which to the other, there passeth a streight line through the Center of the Globe called the Axis of the World: where Note, that the two Poles of the World are the common Sections of all the Meridian Cyrcles.
2. The two Poles of the Ecliptick, which are the two points in which the six Cyrcles of Longitude of Stars do cross or cut each other, and is near about 23 degrees 30 minutes distant from the Poles of the World.
3. The points of Zenith and Nadir, the Zenith is that Point in the Heavens which is directly over our Head, and the Nadir, is on the contrary, directly under our Feet, these two are the Poles of the Horizon, being every where 90 degrees from it, and in these two points do all the Vertical or Azimuthal cyrcles meet or cut each other.
4. The points of East and West, viz. The two points where the Equinoctial cutteth the Horizon; these are also Diametrically opposite, and are the Poles of the Meridian being every where 90 degrees from it.
5. The two Equinoctial points of Aries and Libra, being two points where the Ecliptick cutteth the Equinoctial, and are Diametrically opposite, the former is called the vernal Equinoctial because the Sun coming to it, the spring beginneth; the other is called the Autumnal Equinoctial, because when the Sun cometh to it, the Autumn beginneth.
6. The two Solstitial points, being also diametrically opposite, are the two points on the Globe, where the Ecliptick toucheth the two Tropicks and the Ecliptick in their touch point, viz. in the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn, and these two are called Solstitial points, because the Sunne moving in the Ecliptick, near either of them, which is in June and December, it causeth the days to stand still a while, without a sensible lengthning or shortning.
Here is to be noted, that the Horizon and Meridian Cyrcles are said to be immoveable, because they are fixed to the same place; but all other cyrcles of the Sphear are said to be movable, because they being drawn upon the Surface of the Globe or Sphere, must needs move about with it in the Diurnal motion, yet other men denominate them by the contrary names.
The third thing observed in the Delineations, are the Figures drawn upon the Globe.
THere hath been 48 Asterismes or Constellations observed of ancient time, and about them in this Globe are described certain Figures, not because there are any such Figures in the Heavens, but are only imagined there to give denomination to the Stars of the Firmament, and yet not to all the Stars, for they are innumerable, but onely to such as are most conspicuous, and whereof use may best be made, as occasion serveth.
There are 12 Constellations of the Zodiack, through which the Zodiack passeth, and these give Denomination to the 12 Signes of the Zodiack, in particular these with their number of Stars.
  of old. of late.   of old. of late.
aries 13 21 libra 8 17
taurus 33 43 scorpio 21 16
gemini 18 25 sagittarius 32 14
cancer 9 15 capricornus 28 28
leo 27 40 aquarius 42 41
virgo 26 39 pisces 34 36
There hath been 21 Constellations observed on the North side of the Ecliptick, which are called the Northern Constellations, whose names and number of Stars here follow.
  of old.
The little Bear 7
The great Bear 27
The Dragon 31
Cepheus 11
Bootes 22
The Northern Crown 8
Hercules 09
The Vulture Cadent 10
The Swan 17
Cassiopeia 13
Perseus 26
Auriga 14
Serpentarius 24
The Serpent 18
The Arrow or Dart 5
The Eagle 9
The Dolphin 10
The lesser Horse 4
Pegasus or great Horse 20
Andromeda 23
The Northern Triangle. 4
Antinous. 8
There are 15 Constellations on the Southside of the Ecliptick, which are called the Southern Constellations, whose names and number of Stars here follow.
  of old.
The Whale 22
Orion 38
The River Eridanus 34
The Hare 12
The great Dog 18
The lesser Dog 3
The Ship 45
Hydra 25
The Goblet 7
The Raven 7
The Centaur 37
The Wolf 19
The Altar 7
The Southern Crown 13
The South-fish. 12
Besides the number of the Stars noted in the former Constellations, the modern Astronomers have noted divers others, which were left informes by the Ancients, and put them into their proper Figures; as may be seen in some of the Globes put forth since noble Ticho Brach, namely, Johannes Jansonius, his small Globes of the Year 1620. And in Petrus Plantius his Globes of the Year 1625.
The new Constellations in North Latitude, are these,
Berenices hair 14
The Bee 4
The River Jordan 21
Camelopardalis 18
The River Euphrates 13
The new Constellations in South Latitude are these.
The lesser Crabb 4
The Unicorne 22
Moreover because the antient Astronomers lived all in North Latitude, they could not see the starrs which are neer the South pole, but they have been since discovered by such as have travailed that way, and are put into constellations, namely these,
The Dove 11
The Southern triangle 5
The apous Indica 12
The Peacock 17
The Indian 12
The Crane 13
The Toucan 8
The Hydrus 14
The Phenix 14
The Dorado 6
The Sea Swallow 7
The Camelion 8
The Crosse called Crusero 6
The Flye 4
Besides the Constellations before named, there are some other appearances in the heavens, namely, the White broad cyrcle called Via Lactea, or milkie way: and two little clouds observed neer the South pole. Thus much of the Delineations, or things noted on the outside of the Celestiall Globe.
------
The third thing to be observed in Generall is the use of this Globe,
Which consisteth in these three things following. viz. The knowledge of the
1. Motions.
2. Division,
And Operation of the
3. Propositions.
In the first place of the motions which are also three in number, viz.
1. The Diurnall motion.
2. The Proper motion.
3. The Trembling motion.
First concerning the Motions.
1. The Diurnall motion is made upon the Poles of the World, once about from East toward the West in 24 howres, and this is also called motus raptus, or the motion of the primum mobile.
2. The second motion is called the annuall motion, and is made within the primum mobile upon the Poles of the Ecliptick, according to the succession of the signes, which is contrary to that of the primum mobile, viz. from West toward East, and this motion is called Motus secundus, or Motus proprius, because that every Spheare hath a motion proper to it self, As that of the Sunne sun finisheth once about secundum seriem signorum in the space of 12 months, which is called the Solar yeare, Also Venus, venus, and Mercurie mercury, are moved about the same way in the same time, But the Moon moon is moved about in one month, and the Month is of two sorts, for the time wherein the Moon moon, departeth from any poynt of the Zodiack and returneth to it againe, is called the periodicall Month, or month of peragration, But the time wherein the Moon departeth from the Sunne sun, and overtaketh him againe is called the month of Consecution, or Synodicall month.
 3. The third Motion is called Motus trepidationis, or the trembling or tottering Motion, made by the eighth Sphere of fixed Stars, and all other inferior Orbs, from North to South, and again from South toward North, and so back and forward by the space of 24. Minutes of a degree. This is the cause of the alteration of the greatest declination of the Sun and other Planets. But concerning these internal Motions, more is to be found in reading of the Theoricks of the Planets.
Mars mars moveth through the Zodiack in about two Solar years, and that time is called the yeare of Mars mars.
Jupiter jupiter is moved through the Zodiack in about 12 Solar years, and that time is called the yeare of Jupiter jupiter.
Saturne saturn in about 30 years runneth through the Zodiack, and that time is called the yeare of Saturne saturn.
The fixed Starrs, according to Ptolomie move about the Zodiack in 36000 Solar years; But according to the Alphonsines in 49000 years; And according to Copernicus  in 17000 years; But Gassendus hath it 25000 years; And this time is called the great yeare, or Platonicall yeare.
Secondly concerning the Divisions.
1. First it is called Sphera recta, or a right Sphere, because in such position, the Equinoctiall cutteth the Horizon at right sphericall angles. The properties of this sphere is to have the poles of the world ly in the horizon, and the Equinoctiall passeth through the Zenith and Nadir; and in this sphere not only the Equinoctiall, but also both the Tropicks, and all other the Equinoctiall parallels, are divided into two equall parts by the right horizon, which causeth the dayes, and nights, at all times of the yeare to be equall, viz. 12 howres long between Sun rising and setting without alteration, to those who live under the Equinoctiall line.
2. Secondly it is called Sphaera obliqua, whereof there are so many in number as there be degrees, minutes, seconds, &c. in a quadrant, And it is called oblique, because the Equinoctiall cutteth the horizon with an oblique angle; The properties of this sphere is to have one pole elevated above the horizon, and the other as far depressed; Also because in this sphere the Equinoctiall is divided equally by the horizon, and the parallels of the Equinoctiall unequally, therfore the days, and the nights are equall only twice a year, viz. in the beginning of the Spring, & Autumne, at which times the Sunne passeth over the first points of Aries aries and Libra libra, but at all other times of the year, the days and nights are unequall.
3. It is called Sphera parallela or a parallel Sphere, because the Equinoctiall being the same with the Horizon, all the parallels of the Equinoctiall are also parallell to the Horizon; In this sphere, one of the poles of the World is the Zenith, and the other is the Nadir, and in this sphere the Sun continueth above the Horizon above halfe a yeare together, and again as long under the Horizon, whereby the artificiall day and night are each about half a year long.
Thirdly, now follow the propositions wrought by the Globe.
1. To find the Suns place in the Ecliptick first find the day of the Month, upon the Horizon, and within upon the limb of the Horizon standeth the degree in which the Sun is, this you may apply to the Ecliptick upon the Globe.
To find the Suns Declination.
2. First find the Suns place in the Ecliptick upon the Globe, and bring it to the brazen Meridian, and there account how many degrees it is distant from the Equinoctiall, for the declination of any point in the heavens is its Meridionall distance from the Equator.
The declination of any star upon the Globe, is found by bringing it to the brazen meridian and accounting as before.
To find the right ascention of the Sunne.
3. Move the degree of the Ecliptick wherein the Sun is to the Meridian, and note the degree of the Equinoctiall which cometh to the Meridian with it, for the arch of the Equinoctiall conteyned between that point and the first point of Aries aries, is the right ascention, that is to say, it riseth with it in a right sphere.
The right ascention of a starr is to be accounted as before, if the starr be brought to the Meridian.
Of the Longitude as it is taken on the Celestiall Globe.
4. The Longitude of the Sun, is that arch of the Ecliptick which is contained between the first point of Aries, and that point of the Ecliptick wherein the Sun sun, is; But the Longitude of a Star is that arch of the Ecliptick which is contained between the first point of Aries, and the section of the Ecliptick with a great circle drawn from the pole of the Ecliptick through the center of the starr, being reckoned according to the succession of the signes.
Which to finde,
Lay one end of the Quadrant of altitude upon the pole of the Ecliptick, and the graduated edge thereof, upon the center of the starr, and so it shall shew in the Ecliptick, the signe and degree of Longitude.
Of the Latitude as it is taken on the Celestiall Globe.
5. It is accounted in a great cyrcle distance from the Ecliptick toward either Pole thereof, therefore the Sunn, or any starr being in the Ecliptick, hath no Latitude, but the Moon moon, or any other Planet being not in the Dragons Head ascending node, or Dragons taile descending node, or other stars being not in the Ecliptick, are said to have Latitude so many degrees as they be distant from the Ecliptick toward either pole thereof.
Which to finde,
Lay one end of the quadrant of altitude upon the pole of the Ecliptick, and the graduated edge thereof, upon the center of the starr, then may you see how many degrees thereof are contained between the starr and the Ecliptick, and that is the Latitude thereof.
But if you want the quadrant of Altitude then take a pair of compasses, and setting one point in the center of the starr, extend the other till in the neerest distance it touch the Ecliptick, and the compasses so opened and applied to the Equinoctiall, shall shew how many degrees the Latitude is.
Here note,
That the declination and right ascention of the Sunn and Starrs, have respect to the Equinoctiall, but their Longitudes and Latitudes have respect to the Ecliptick.
To rectifie the Globe according to the Latitude of your place.
6. Elevate the proper pole so farr above the horizon as the Latitude of the place proposed, by moving the pole of the Globe so high by help of the degrees of the meridian.
But to rectify for the Suns place is.
7. After the former rectification, to bring the Suns place in the Ecliptick, to the meridian, turning up the index of the howre wheele to 12 at noon.
And to rectifie for the Zenith is,
8. After the first rectification, to fasten the nutt or screw of the Quadrant of altitude at the Zenith, that is, so many degrees from the Equinoctiall as the Pole is elevated.
To find the Amplitude of the Sun or any star that riseth and setteth.
9. The Amplitude is the horizontall distance of rising or setting from the true points of East and West, which to find rectify the Globe by the sixt Proposition according to the Latitude, and bring the degree of the Sun in the Ecliptick, or Center of the Starr to the horizon, and therein see how many degrees it is from the East or West.
To find what starrs do not set in any Latitude.
10. By the sixt Prop. rectify according to the Latitude, and turning about the Globe mark what starrs passe between the elevated pole and the horizon, for those (if the North pole be elevated) are contained within the arctick circle and cannot set; for the arctick circle as heretofore it hath been taken, is drawn upon the North pole, through the north point of the Horizon.
To find the time when the Sunn or any Starr riseth or setteth.
11. By the seaventh Prop. rectifie for the Sunns place, and move the degree of the Sun or center of the Starr to the East or West part of the horizon, and then the index of the hower wheel shall shew the time.
To find how the Constellations are scituate at any time of the Night.
12. By the seaventh Prop. rectifie, for the Suns place, and move about the Globe till the index come to the howre desired, and there hold the Globe to shew the present scituation of the Constellations.
To find the Oblique ascention of the Sunn or any Starr that riseth and setteth.
13. By the sixt Prop. rectifie for the Latitude, and bring the degree of the Sun, or center of the Star to the East part of the horizon, and observe the degree of the Equinoctiall which riseth with it, for the arch of the Equinoctiall contained between the first point of Aries aries, and the point of the Equinoctiall so ascending is called the oblique ascention.
To find the Ascentionall difference of the Sun sun.
14. By the third Prop. find the right ascention, and again by the thirteenth prop. find the oblique ascention thereof, and subtract the lesser of them from the greater, and the remain is the difference of ascention: for the difference of ascention, is only the difference between the right & oblique ascentions: where note that the difference of ascention is an arch of the AEquinoctiall, and is alwaies the time of the Sunns rising before 6 and after 6, the time of the year being considered.
Hereby.
15. To get the time of the Sun's rising to a minute of an howre; turn the ascentionall difference into time, allowing 15 gr. thereof to every howre, and to every degree 4 minuts of an howre; And if the Sun be in the Northern signes the ascentionall difference is the time of the Suns rising before 6 a clock, if in the Southern then after 6 a clock.
Again.
16. Having the time of the Suns rising, before or after 6 a clock, you may get the length of the Artificiall day (that is, the time of the Sunns continuance above the horizon) If the Suns declination be North add it to 6, if South subtract it from 6, and so shall come forth the semidiurnall arch, this doubled giveth the length of the artificiall day; But if the length of the artificiall night be required, then work contrary to that of the day.
To find the time of the day by having the Altitude of the Sunn.
17. First by a Quadrant or some other instrument find the Altitude of the Sunn above the horizon, and then by the 6, 7, and 8, prop. rectify the Globe for the Latitude, the Suns place, and the Zenith, and bring the degree of the Ecliptick wherein the Sunn is, to agree to the same Altitude upon the edge of the quadrant of altitude, and then the index of the howre wheele, shall shew the time of the day.
To find the Azimuth of the Sunn by having his Altitude.
18. The Azimuth of the Sunn, is the distance thereof, accounted in the Horizon from East West, north or South; by the 6, 7 & 8, prop. rectify the Globe, and bring the Sunns place in the Ecliptick, to agree to the same Altitude on the graduated edge of the Quadrant of Altitude, and then the quadrant of Altitude shall shew his azimuth in the horizon.
To find the Azimuth of the Sun at any time of the Day.
19, By the 6, 7 and 8 prop. rectify the Globe, and turne it about till the index of the howrewheele, do point to the howre given, then lay the quadrant of altitude upon the Suns place in the Ecliptick, and it sheweth the Azimuth in the Horizon.
At any time of the year, to find the time of Day break, or beginning of Crepusculus (if any be.)
20. By the 6, 7, & 8 prop. rectifie the globe and elevate the opposite degree of the Sun at the West 18 degrees above the horizon, and then the index of the howre wheel shall shew the time.
Having the altitude of any known Starr, to find the howre of the night.
21. By the 6, 7, & 8 prop. rectifie the globe and move about the Globe till the starr have the given altitude in the graduated edge of the quadrant of altitude, & then shall the index of the howre wheele shew the howre required.
Having any known Starr at the Meridian to find the howre.
22. By the 6, & 7 prop. rectifie the globe and turn the globe till the same starr come to the brasen meridian, so shall the index of the howre wheel shew the howre.
Of the Poeticall rising and setting of Starrs. COSMICALL.
A Starr riseth Cosmicall when it riseth with the Sunn, and setteth Cosmicall, if it sett when the Sunn riseth.
To find the time of the yeare when a Starr riseth Cosmicall
23. By the 6 prop: rectify, and bring the starr to the East part of the Horizon, and observe the degree of the Ecliptick which is at the east part of the horizon with it, and then find in the circle of the horizon what day of the month answereth to the same degree of the Ecliptick.
To find the time of the year when a Starr setteth Cosmicall.
24. By the 6 prop. rectifie and bring the starr to the West part of the horizon, and note the degree of the Ecliptick at the east part of the horizon, and find the day of the month on the horizon as before.
ACRONICALL.
A Starr riseth Acronicall, when it riseth in the East, and the Sunn is setting in the West; And it setteth Acronicall when it setteth with the Sunn.
To find the time of the year when a Starr riseth Acronicall.
25. By the 6 prop. rectifie, and bring the starr to the east part of the horizon, and note the degree of the Ecliptick cut by the horizon at the West, and find the day of the month answering thereunto upon the horizon as before.
To find the time of the year when a Starr setteth Acronicall.
26. By the sixt prop. rectifie and bring the Starr to the West part of the horizon, and note the degree of the Ecliptick cutt at the West of the horizon and find the day of the Month upon the Horizon as before.
Heliacall.
Heliacall rising of a starr is the rising of a starr out of the Sun beams, for then it appeareth before the Sun rising, though before it could not be seen by reason of its neernes to the Sun being within the Arch of vision.
Heliacall setting is when a starr cometh within the Sun beams, or when a starr is entring into its arch of vision, and then cannot be seen setting after the Sunn, by reason of its neernes to the Sun.
The Arch of vision is the Arch of a verticall circle contained between the Horizon and the center of the Sun after it is sett, or before it riseth, this altereth according to the severall magnitudes of the starrs, for the greater the starr is, the lesse is the Arch of vision, and contrarie.
The Arches of Vision belonging to the Stars, according to their severall magnitudes are these.
To the First 12 To the Planets.  
Second 13 Venus 5
Third 14 Mercurie 10
Fourth 15 Saturne 11
Fift 16 Jupiter 9
Sixt 17 Mars 12 2/3
Least 18 Moone uncertain. 
To find the time of the year when a starr riseth Heliacall.
27. By the sixt Prop. rectifie, and bring the starr to the east part of the horizon, and note the degree of the Ecliptick elevated above the west part of the horizon acording to the arch of vision appertaining to the same starr, and then as before, find the day of the month on the limb of the Horizon, answering to the opposite degree of the Ecliptick so elevated at the west as aforesaid.
To find the time of the year when a Starr setteth Heliacall.
28. By the sixt prop. rectify and bring the starr to the west part of the Horizon, and note the degree of the Ecliptick elevated at the east part of the horizon, according to the arch of vision belonging to the same star, & by the opposite of it find the day of the month on the limb of the horizon as before.
------
Description of the Terrestiall GLOBE.
IT is a round or sphericall body, representing the forme of the earth and waters.
On this Globe are also described the ten circles of the sphaera armillaris, viz. the Horizon, Meridian, Equator, Ecliptick, the two Colures which with the fower lesser circles, viz. the two Tropicks, and the two polar circles.
Besides these common circles there are described upon this Globe divers other circles passing through both poles of the World, these are called Meridians, or circles of Longitude; Also certain other circles parallel to the Equinocticall, called circles or parallels of Longitude Latitude; Also certain oblique circular lines passing through the centers of certain roses (so called) and these are called Rhombs, Courses, or points of the compasse.
On this Globe are described the known parts of the World divided into severall quarters, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, to which is added the unknown land about the South Pole called Megalanica. And these quarters of the World are subdivided into severall Kingdoms and Provinces, as may be seen in the Geographers.
The ZONES.
This Globe is also divided into five Zones, one is called the Torrid or burnt Zone, and this lyeth between the Tropicks, the inhabitants hereof are called Amphiscii, because they have two contrary meridionall shadows in a year.
Two are called temperate, and these lye between the Tropicks and the Polar circles; The inhabitants hereof are called Heterescii, because they have their Meridionall shadow one way all the yeare.
The two frigid Zones, are comprehended within the polar circles; The inhabitants whereof are called Periscii because their shadow at some time of the yeare goeth round about them.
The Inhabitants of the Terrestiall Globe, do also receive other names relating to their positions each to other.
The Antipodes are such as dwell diametrically opposite each to other, & have all things contrary, as seasons of the yeare, and times of the day.
The Antoeci are such as dwell so far remote from the Equinoctiall on one side, as the other dwelleth on the other side, both under the same Meridian.
These have some things common, and some things proper, the common, as to have their noon tides together: Proper as that the winter of the one, is the others Summer time, and the longest day of the one, is the shortest of the other.
The Periaea are such as live in the same parallel of Latitude toward the same Pole, and are directly opposite each to other, both having the same meridian, These have their Summers, Winters, and increase, and shortning of dayes and nights together, but the night of the one is the day of the other.
Parallels of the Longest day.
Besides the parallels of Latitude formerly mentioned, there are other parallels immagined to be drawn upon this Globe, which are called parallels of the longest day: The first of them is to be drawn at that distance from the Equinoctiall, where the longest day of the year is 12 1/4 howres long: The second where the longest day of the yeare is 12 1/2 howres long: The third where the longest day of the year is 12 3/4 howres long, &c. through places increasing their longest day by 1/4 of an howre, till you come to the parallel where the longest day of the yeare is 24 howres long, which is under the polar cyrcles; these being drawn each way from the Equinoctiall toward each pole, divide the Globe into unequall parts or spaces, for though they be equall in time, yet they agree not in equall distance of place, but are greater or broader neer to the Equinoctiall, and are narrower the farther they are from it.
CLIMATS.
A Climate containeth two of the parallels of the longest day, and altereth the longest day by the space of half an howre, beginning at the Equinoctiall, and are in all 24, which end under the polar circle; but the antients, for want of knowledge of the parts under the Equinoctiall made at first but seaven Climats, and called them by names, & afterwards were added two more, which made up their number to be nine. And these of the antients began to be accounted at 12 and 15degree from the Equator.
Propositions on the Terrestiall GLOBE. To find the Latitude of any place sett thereon.
Bring the place to the brazen meridian, and therein account how many degrees are betwixt the Equinoctiall and the place, for that is the Latitude you seek; for the Latitude is but the remotion of the Zenith of a place frõ the equator.
To find the Longitude of a place set thereon.
Bring the place under the brasen meridian, and then the meridian shall cut the Equinoctiall in the Longitude of the same place; for the Longitude is but the remotion of a place from the first meridian which passeth through the Azores accounting Eastwardly.
To find the distance between two places.
Put the center of the quadrant of altitude upon one of the places, and the graduated edge upon the other, & the degrees interjacent shall shew their distance in degrees, and these may be turned into miles by multiplying by 60.
To find how one place beareth or lyeth frõ another.
Elevate the pole according to the Latitude of the place where you are, & fasten the quadrant of altitude at the Zenith, then bring the place where you are to the zenith, and move the graduated edge of the quadrant of altitude to the other place, and then the end of the quadrant of altitude shall fall upon the horizon in the point of bearing.
To find what howre of the day or night it is at any place on the Terrestiall Globe.
Bring the place where you are to the meridian, and turne the index of the howre wheel to the howre it is with you at the present, then turne the other place to the brasen meridian, and the index of the howre wheele will shew the howre desired.
To find by the Terrestiall Globe the quantity of the longest day at any place assigned.
Elevate the pole of the Globe according to the latitude of the place given, and bring the Solstitiall point of cancer (if the north pole be elevated) to the meridian, & turn the index of the howre wheel to 12 at noon, then if you put the Solstitiall point of Cancer to the west part of the horizon, the index on the howre wheel sheweth the time of Sun setting there, & that is also the semidiurnall arch, & being doubled giveth the length of the day, if it exceed not 24 howres, which end under the polar circle.
But if the place assigned be within the polar cyrcle, then elevate the pole of the globe according to the latitude of the place, & turn the globe till some point of the vernall signes in the Ecliptick touch the north point of the horizon & note how many degrees of the Ecliptick is from the Solstitiall point of Cancer, for that number doubled giveth neerly the length of the day in our common days, and these days may be turned into weeks or months, &c.
Finis.


