COSMOGRAPHIE In Four Bookes. CONTAINING THE CHOROGRAPHIE AND HISTORIE Of the whole VVORLD, And all the principall Kingdomes, Provinces, Seas, and Isles thereof.
------
By PETER HEYLYN.
------
Acts 17.24.26. Deus qui fecit mundum, & omnia quae in eo sunt; fecit ex uno omne genus hominum, inhabitare super universam faciem terrae, definiens tempora & ter-minos habitationis eorum.
Plin. in Proem. l.7. MVNDVS, & in eo Terra, Gentes, Maria, Insulae, insignes Urbes, ad hunc modum se habent.
------
LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at his Shop over against Saint Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLII.

OF SWETHLAND.
------
SWETHLAND is bounded on the East with Muscovie, on the West with the Dofrine hils which divide it from Norway; on the North with the great Frozen Ocean, spoken of before; on the South with Denmark, Liefland, and the Baltick Sea. So called from the Sueci, Suethans, or Suethidi, and the word Land added for a termination; of which more hereafter.
It is in length from Stockholm unto the borders of Lapland, above a 1000 Italian miles; and in breadth from Stockholm, lying on the Bodner Sea, to the borders of Denmark, about twenty good dayes journey on horse-back: insomuch as they which have travelled the length and breadth of it on this side of Lapland and the Gulf, account it little lesse then all Italy and France together: but taking in Lapland, and the Provinces on the other side of the Gulf, bigger then both by the quantity of 900 miles.
The situation of it in regard of the heavenly bodies, is the same with Norway, under the same Parallels and Degrees; but of so different a temper, both for soil and air, as if disposed of under severall and long distant Climes. For the Aire here is very pure, but not so sharp, and insupportable, as it is in Norway: though in some places where the Moores and Waters setle for want of care to open and cleanse the water-courses, they have great fogges and mists which doe somewhat putrefie it: And for the soil, it is more fertile then any of the other Northern Provinces: so that besides those necessaries which they keep for themselves, they usually transport into other Countries store of Malt and Barley; together with great quantities of Brasse, Lead, Steel, Copper, Iron, the hides of Goats, Bucks, Oxen, and costly furres. They have also some Mines of Silver not mixt with any other metall; plenty of fish in their Lakes and Rivers; abundance of Pine-trees, Firre, Oaks, both for ships and houses; yeilding besides, among the woods, good store of Tarre, and Honey, and some other necessaries. But hereof we shall speak more punctually in the severall Provinces.
The principall mountains of this Country are the Dofrine hils, a vast and continuall ridge of mountaines which divide it from Norway. And though they want not Rivers fit for common uses; yet partly by reason of their great frosts and flakes of Ice, partly by reason of the falling of trees which lie crosse their Channels; they have not many Navigable, or of any great fame. The principall of such as be, are 1 Meler, at the mouth whereof stands the City of Stockholm: 2 Lusen, 3 Dalecarlie, giving name to the Province so called, or as denominated from it. And of the Lakes, whereof here are exceeding many, that of most note is the lake of Werett which receiving it into 24 Rivers disburdneth it self at one mouth into the Baltick, with such noise and fury, that they call it commonly the Devils head.
The people are naturally strong and active, provident, patient, and industrious; hospitable towards strangers, whom they entertain with great humanity: so healthy, that if they doe not shorten their dayes by excesse and riot, they live commonly to 140 years of age; and so laborious, that a Begger is not seen amongst them: exceeding apt to learn as well Tongues and Sciences, as the Arts Mechanicall: (Gothland.)every man in a manner being his own Artificer, without imploying Smith, Mason, Carpenter, or any of other manuall trades: very valiant both on foot and horseback, which their long wars against the Danes, and their late wars in Germany, have given good proof of. Their women are discreet and modest, free from that intemperance which these Northern parts are subject to. Both sexes use a corrupt Dutch, common to all three Northerne kingdoms: except in Finland, and the Provinces on the other side of the Bodner sea, where they partake somewhat of the Muscovite or Russian language.
The Christian Religion was first planted amongst them by the care and diligence of Ansgarius Archbishop of Breme, the Apostle general of the North; corrupt with Popish superstitions, it was reformed, according to the Augustane Confession, in the time of Gustavus Ericus, the first of the present Royall familie; sollicited thereunto by one Petre Nevicius a Lutheran Divine, and Lawrence the Archdeacon of Strengnes; but chiefly moved (as others say) by a desire to appropriate to himselfe the goods of the Church. And this appeares to have had some strong influence upon him in it, in that he presently seised upon what he pleased; and made a Law that Bishops should enjoy no more then the King thought fit: yet having pretty well lessened their Revenues, he was content they should remain as formerly both in power and number, reserving to himselfe and his successours the nomination of the persons; but so as the approbation of the Clergy (in a kinde of election) doth usually goe along with the Kings appointment.
The Bishops are in number seven, that is to say, 1 of Lincopen, containing in his Diocese 226 Parishes; 2 of Vexime, under whom are 210. 3 of Scara, ruling over the same number of Churches; 4 of Strengnes, under whom are an hundred onely; 5 of Aboe, the greatest for extent of all, as comprehending under it 500 Parishes; 6 of Wiburg, and 7 of Habsay, whose Dioceses for the most part lye out of the bounds of Sweden, in Muscovie, Livonia, and some other of the out parts of Poland: all of them under the Archbishop of Upsal, as their Metropolitan, whose Diocese extending into Lapland and Finmarch, containeth 171 Parish Churches. By which accompt there are in all the kingdome of Swethland, but 1417 Parishes; but many of them of a thousand or eight hundred families: the people being dispersed in Forrests and other places, where they have store of timber to build them houses, and store of pasturage for their Cattell; which is the reason why they have not so many great townes, nor so well inhabited, as is usuall in far lesser Countries: As for the Authority of these Bishops, they still retaine their voice in Parliament, and with them so many of the inferiour Clergie, as are from every Socken, (a certain number of Parishes like our Rurall Deaneries) deputed to appeare there in the name of the Church: the affaires whereof the Bishops do direct and order aswell in as out of publick meetings, according to the Ecclesiasticall Constitutions formerly established; and if any great occasion be, they may either advise with their Consistorials, or call a Diocesan Synod, (as they thinke most fit) and therein make such Lawes and Canons, as they conceive to be most proper for their owne edification.
The whole kingdom is divided into two parts, the one lying on the East, the other on the West side of the Bay or Gulf of Bodner, called Sinus Bodicus in Latine, being a large and spacious branch of the Baltick Sea extending from the most southernly point of Gothland as farre as to Lapland on the north. According to which division we have the Provinces of 1 Gothland and 2 Sweden, lying on the West side of the Gulfe; 3 Lapland, shutting it up upon the North, 4 Bodia or Bodden, and 5 Finland, on the East side thereof; and 6 the Swedish Islands, where it mingleth with the rest of the Baltick.
1. GOTHLAND.
GOTHLAND, is bounded on the East with the Bodner Sea, on the West with the Mountains which divide it from Norwey, and so much of Denmark as lies in the same continent with it; on the North with Sweden; on the south with the sea Baltick. So called either from the Gothes, whose originall Countrey it is commonly affirmed to be; or quasi goot landt, from the goodnesse and fertility of the soyl (Goot landia, quae Germanice Terra bona sonat (as Maginus out of Munster hath it) the soyle being very fruitfull for corne and cattell, affording plenty of Mines, with great store of fish, and generally a better conditioned Countrey then any of the rest of these Northern Regions.
It is divided commonly into Ostrogoth, or East Gothland; Westergoth, divided from the former by the great lake of Weret spoken of before; and South Gothland, subdivided into Smalandia, Tuiscia, and Verendia. Chief townes whereof in Ostrogoth, are 1 Lincopen, a Bishops See; 2 Loduse, adorned with a very fair Haven: in Westergoth, 3 Scara on the lake Weret, a Bishops See also; 4 Elseburg on the Western sea, betwixt Denmark and Norwey; a place of consequence; and flankerd with two very strong Castles in the parts adjoining, the one called Croneberg, and the other Goldberg. 5 Tragualle, remarkable for iron workes, occasioned by the mines adjoining. And finally in South Gothland, there is 6 Vexim, or Vexio, another of the Episcopall Sees: 7 Walburg, a reasonable fair Town, with a strong Castle. 8 Rottenby, and 9 Elcholm in Verendia, neer the confines of Denmark, 10 Colmar, a noted and well traded Port on the Baltick Sea, beautified with a Castle not inferiour to that of Millain; and so well fortified throughout, that at the taking of it by Christiern the fourth of Denmark, anno 1611. there were found mounted on the Workes 108 brasse peeces of Ordinance, six  men of war to guard the Haven, with all manner of Ammunition in proportion to them.
(Gothes) The first Inhhabitants of these south parts of Scandia, are commonly affirmed to have beene the GOTHES, whom Jornandes in his Book de Rebus Geticis, makes to have issued out of this countrey, and to plant themselves on the north bankes of the Ister, nere the Euxine sea, some time before the Trojan war: ascribing to them whatsoever is reported in old writers of the antient Scythians, as their encounter with Vexoris or Sesostris the King of Egypt, the Act and acheivements of the Amazons, their congresse with Alexander the Great in his Persian war, and the like to these. In which Jornandes being himself a Goth, is no more to be credited, then Geofrie of Monmouth a Welchman, in the storie of Brute and his successours, to whom he doth ascribe the taking and sack of Rome under the conduct of Brennus, whom he makes to be the brother of Belinus a King of Britain. Most probable it is that they were originally a Dutch or German people, part of the great Nation of the Suevi, called by Tacitus the Gothones, inhabiting in his time (as it is conceived) in the land of Prussia. Who finding their own countrey too narrow for them might passe over the Baltick into the next adjoining Regions: and not well liking that cold clime might afterwards in some good numbers goe to seek new dwellings, and at lest seat themselves on the bankes of Ister, where Jornandes found them. That they were Dutch originally, besides the generall name of the Gothones or Gothes, and those of Ostrogothes, and Wisigothes, into which they were afterwards divided; the particular names of Alaric, Theodorick, Riccared, (the names of their Kings and Captains) seem to me to evidence. That they were once seated in this Countrie doth appeare as plainly 1 by the name of Gothland here still remaining; 2 by the title of Rex Gothorum, which the Kings of Swethland keep in the Royall style; and 3 by some inscriptions in antient unknown Charcters engraven on the rocks neere Scara in the Continent, and Wisby in the Isle of Gothland, supposed by learned men to be some monument of that people. And finally that their fixt dwellings, when first known by this name amongst the Romans, was on the north side of the Ister; is evident by the testimony of all antient Writers, from the time of Antoninus Caracalla, with whom they had some tumultuarie skirmishes in his way towards Persia; till their violent irruption into Italie and the Western Provinces: most famous in this intervall for a great fight with Decius the Roman Emperour, whom they overcame and slew in battell, anno 253. In the time of Valens and Valentinian the Roman Emperours a quarrell being grown amongst them, managed by Phritigernes and Athanaricus the leaders of the opposite factions, Phritigernes over throwne in fight had recourse to Valens, from whom he received such succours, that giving his adversary another day for it, he obtained the victory. Whereupon Phritigernes and his partie received the Gospell, but intermixt and corrupt with the leaven of Arianism, by the practise of Valens, who sent them none but Arian teachers, to whom and their faction in the Church, he was wholly addicted. Afterwards the whole Nation being driven over the Ister by the barbarous Huns, they obtained of Valens the out parts of Thrace for an habitation, on the condition they should serve under the pay of the Emperour, and become Christians: the cause that Arianism overspread the whole Nation generally, which had before infected but one partie onely. Ulphilas a devout and learned man, was their first Bishop; who for their better edification in the way of godlinesse, invented the Gothick Characters, and translated the Scriptures into that language: in the studie whereof they so well profited, that many of them in the time of their first conversion, suffered death for it at the hands of Athanaricus, and were counted Martyrs. Burdned by Valens, and denyed their accustomed pay, they harasse and depopulate the rest of Thrace, marching towards Constantinople: encountred in the way by Valens, whom they overcame, and killed, after all his favours. Vanquished by Theodosius the succeeding Emperour in many battels, they became good neighbours, inlarging their bounds with his leave and license as far as Pannonia, and grown into such estimation with him that Ricimir and Franita, two of that Nation, did obtaine the Consulship: not to say any thing of that exorbitant power and favour which Gainas had attained unto in the Court it selfe. Made insolent by so great honours, and apt to pick quarrels with their Patrons, they invaded Italy in two great bodies, consisting of no fewer then 200000 fighting men: the first whereof under the conduct of Rhadaguisus, was discomfited and cut in pieces by Stilico Lieutenant to Honorius the Western Emperour, at Fesulae in the straits of the Appennine: the other by his treachery permitted to passe, sacked Rome, and subdued the most part of Italy, under the leading of Alaricus. He dying immediately after this great victory, left the fruits of it to his son Athaulfus, who marrying with Galla Placidia, the Emperours sister, relinquished Italy, and had all Gaul Narbonnoise, and a great part of Hispania Tarraconensis assigned unto him: where he erected the kingdome of the WisiGothes, or Western Gothes, possessed of Spain and Tingitana, for the space of 300 years, and upward, when they lost that kingdome to the Moores, as hath there been said. In the meane time the Gothes which were left in their owne countries, distinguished from these by the name of Ostro-Gothes by reason of their more Eastern situation, kept themselves in quiet, first subdued by the Huns, and when by Wilamer, freed from that subjection, not intermedling or attempting any thing against the Empire, till called by Zeno Emperour of Constantinople into Italie, against Odoacer and the Heruli, who had then subdued it. Which action they managed with so much prudence and good fortune by their King Theodorick, that they vanquished Odoacer, possessed Italie, and held it above 60 yeares, when broken in many set battels by Belisarius and Narses, Lieutenants for the Emperour Justinian, their Kingdome and name there came unto an end.
As for the Kings of the Gothes, we have a succession of them in Jornandes, from Berig, who first conducted them out of Scandia towards the East, till the going of Theodorick into Italie: but made  up with so little probalitie, that I dare give no more credit to it then to the stories of Brute, Dan, Fergus, or the Lady Scota Pharaohs daughter. (Gothes.) Such of whom there is any certaine knowledge and succession are these few that follow.
The KINGS of the GOTHES.
344 1 Athanaricus king of the Gothes, in the time of Constantius and Constans the sons of Constantine the Great.
357 2 Alaricus, the first of that name in the time of Constantius.
 3 Phritigernes King of the Gothes in the time of Valens, the first Christian Prince among the Gothes.
370 4 Athanaricus II. in the time of the Emperours Valens, Gratian and Valentinian the second, under whom the Gothes were first setled on this side of the Ister.
379 5 Rhadaguisus, who in the time of Honorius, first led the Gothes into Italie, slain at the battell of Fesulae.
410 6 Alaricus II. who pursuing the war of Italy, sacked Rome, subdued Naples, and the most of Italy.
412 7 Athaulfus the son of Alarick the second, who first erected the Kingdom of the Wisigothes in Gaul and Spain, continuing there for the space of 300 yeares and upwards: the present Kings of Spain coming from his stock. 
417 8 Athalaricus King of the Gothes remaining in the East, at the departure of Rhadaguise and Alaricus distinguished from their plantations by the name of Ostrogothes: vanquished by Attila, they became subject to the Huns, in the time of Theodosius the second, and Valentinian the third, Emperour of the East and West. 
9 Wilamir, one of the bloud Royall of the Gothes, taking advantage of some quarrels amongst the sons of Attila, shooke off that yoke, and recovered the kingdom of the Gothes; in the time of the Emperour Marcianus.
10 Theodomir son of Winithar, and brother of Wilamir in the time of Leo Emperour of Constantinople.
11 Theodorick son of Theodomir, kept at Constantinople in his youth as a Pledge or Hostage for his Father, where he was instructed in all the Greeke and Roman learning, and made the adopted son (as is said by Scaliger) of the Emperour Zeno: by whom he was sent into Italy against Odoacer and the Heruli erecting there the kingdome of the Ostrogothes, which continued till the reign of Justinian, when destroyed by Belisarius and Narses as before is said; the name of Gothes in Italy being thus extinct, but their bloud intermixt with the best Italian. 
The summe of their whole story, for varieties sake take thus out of Du Bartas.
The warlike Goth which whilom issued forth
From the cold frozen Islands of the North,
Incamp'd by Vistula, but th'Air almost
Being there as cold as in the Baltick coast,
He with victorious Armes Sclavonia gaines,
The Transilvanian and Valachian plaines.
Then flies to Thracia, and then leaving Greeks,
Greedy of spoile, foure times he bravely seeks
To pluck from Rome, then Mars his Minion,
The plumes which she from all the world had won:
Guided by Rhadaguise, and Alarick,
Bold Vindimarus and Theodorick.
Thence flies to France; from whence expulst, his Legions
Rest ever since upon the Spanish Regions.
The Armes of these Kings are said to have been Or, three Ravens with displayed wings Purple, membred Gules. And let this suffice for the Originall, successes, and finall period of the Gothes; reserved by me unto this place, because most commonly conceived to be their originall countrey; at least the place out of which they issued, when they first moved towards the East to seeke new dwellings.
SWEDEN.
SWEDEN is bounded on the East with the Bodner Sea, on the West with the Dofrine hils, which part it from Norwey; on the North with Lapland, on the South with Gotland. So called from the Suethans or Suethidi, the old Inhabitants hereof, of whom more anon. A countrey sufficiently fruitfull, but for the goodnesse of the soil inferiour to Gothland, and not so well planted or inhabited as that is, by reason of the vast Woods which they will not suffer to be destroyed, and the greatnesse of some marishes hitherto undrained: but might be made as rich and fertile, if the people would, as appeareth by that plenty of corn growing amongst the Woods, though much hindered by their shade and thicknesse both from Sunne and raine. (Lapland.)But for the character of this Countrey we had it formerly, when we spake of Swethland in the generall; relating specially to this as the principall part.
And as the largest and principall part of this great body it containes in it many Provinces, and subdivisions, as namely 1 Upland, 2 Suderman, 3 Noricia, 4 Westman, 5 Dalecarle, 6 Wermelund, 7 Copperdale, 8 Gestricia, 9 Helsingen, 10 Middelphat, 11 Angerman, bordering on Lapland, the furthest of these Provinces towards the North. Many of which have no Townes or Cities of any greatnesse or beauty, the people living thin, and scattered, where they have wood for building, pasturage for their Beasts, and elbow roome enough for themselves and their Cattell. Of these the principall are 1 Upsal, an Archbishops See, and an Universitie, situate not far from the Bay of Bodner: beautified with a large Cathedrall, wherein many of the antient Kings of Swethland are interred. From this City the Countrey hereabouts is styled Archiepiscopatus Upsalensis. 2 Holm, by the Inhabitants called Stockholm, by the Russians Stecolne, the Royall seat of the Kings, a noted and well traded Port, and the chief of the kingdome: exceeding strong both by Art and Nature, as being situate in the Marishes like Venice, at the mouth of the Lake, or River of Meler, the passage to it out of the Bay, being very narrow and by consequence easily defended, and yet so deep withall, that the greatest ships of burden may saile up to the City: the Port within the Strait being so safe and capacious, that it is able to receive at one time 300 sail, which usually ride there without any Anchour. The Castle of this City is conceived to be one of the strongest holds in the world, fortified for the more assurance of it with 400 brasse peeces, many of which are double Canons. 3 Nicopen, a Sea town on the same Bay also. These three are in that part hereof which is called Upland. Then there is 4 Strengnes, an Episcopall See; and 5 Telge, on the lake of Meler, in the Province of Suderman; the title and estate of Charles father of Gustavus Adolphus late King of Sweden, before his getting of the Crown called Duke of Suderman. Next in the Province of Westman, there are 6 Arbogen, on the West side of the said Lake of Meler; and 7 Arose, rich in silver mines; out of which are made the best Dollars of Sweden: the mines here being so rich and profitable, that out of every fifteen pound weight of silver, the workmen draw a pound weight of gold. 8 Helsinge, upon the Bay of Bodner in the Province of Helsingen, taking name from hence. 9 Ozebo, or Ourbou, a strong piece in Nerisia; and 10 Lesinger, on the Bay of Bodner, one of the furthest North of Sweden, distinctly and specially so called.
LAPLAND.
LAPLAND, the most Northern part of all Scandia, hath on the East Russia, on the West the Province or Prefecture of Wardhuys, in the kingdome of Norwey; on the North the main frozen Ocean, and on the South Bodia or Bodden on both sides of the Bay so called.
It is named thus originally from the Lappi or Lappones, the Inhabitants of it; as they are from their blockish behaviour; the word Lappon signifying the same with ineptus or insulfus in Latine, for such they are: rude, barbarous, and without the knowledge of Arts or Letters, as also without corn and houses, or any certain habitations, (except onely in Finmarch) feeding for the most part on fish, and the flesh of wild beasts, with the skins whereof sowed together they hide their nakednesse. Generally they are meer Idolaters, giving divine honour all day following to that living creature whatsoever it be, which they see at their first setting out in the morning: selling winds to mariners great Sorcerers, and abhorring the sight of strangers, whom till of late they used to flee from, at their first approach; but within few yeares past beginning to be more sociable and familiar. In a word, they are the true descendants of the Antient Finni (possessed in old times of all that tract which lyeth betweene the Bay of Finland and the Frozen Ocean) whose naturall rudenesse and barbaritie, unmixt with the conditions of more civill people, they doe still retain.
It is divided into the Eastern and the Western Lapland. The former appertaining to the Knez or Great Duke of Muscovie, by which people the Inhabitants are called Dikiloppi, or the wild Lappians; is subdivided into Biarmia and Corelia, of which if there be any thing in them worth taking notice of, wee shall there speake more. The latter doth belong to the Crown of Sweden, subdivided into 2 parts also, that is to say, Finmarch, and 2 Scricfinnia.
1 FINMARCH, being that part hereof which lyeth next to Norwey, is the more populous of the two, the people for the most part idolatrous, but by the neighbourhood of the Norwegians, and resort of strangers unto Wardhuys, and the parts adjoining, somewhat civilized; and in the borders of both kingdoms savouring of Religion, possessed of sheds or sorry houses, & those house reduced to parishes, under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Upsal, the chiefe of which, (if there be any chief amongst them) are named 1 Samman, and 2 Hielso. Called Finmarch, as the antient bounds and Marches of the Finni (of whom more anon) and therefore erroneously by Maginus made a part of the kingdom of Norwey.
2 SCRICFINNIA lyeth between Finmarch and Russia, the name derived from the Finni, a great people of Scandia, and Scriken a Dutch word signifying leaping, sliding or bounding, for such is their gate. An etymologie not much improbable, in that the wooden-soled shoes with sharp bottomes, which they used for their more speedy sliding over the yce, of which this countrey is full, are by the Germans (who also use them) called Skates. Scrikeshoenen, or sliding-shoes. The ancient Writers call this people Scrictofinni. (Finland.)
These are indeed the naturall and proper Laplanders; and unto these the former character doth of right belong. Of stature very low, little more then Pigmeys, but strong and active, well skilled in Archerie, and patient of cold and labour. Much given to hunting of wild beasts whom they kill with their bowes, devoure the flesh, and cloath themselves with their skins, which they tie at the top of their heads, and leave no place open but for the sight, giving thereby occasion unto some to write, that they are hairie all over like kine or horses. Such Deere (whereof they have great plenty) as they take unkilled, they make to draw in little carts, as they shift their Quarters. But having served them for a while they are killed at last, though perhaps for nothing but their skinnes; a certaine number of which they pay yeerly to the King of Sweden in the way of tribute. Three companies of these Laplanders, so clad and armed as aforesaid, came into Germanie in the year 1630 to serve Gustavus in those wars; looked on with admiration by all spectators.
Townes we must look for none here, where no houses be: and yet there are some sheds and cabbins on the Sea shore; which Mariners having made for their refreshment when they came on land, have bestowed some names on, and possibly in time may become good townes, now not worth the naming.
BODIA.
BODIA, BODEN, or BODNER, is situate on the South of Scricfinnia, betwixt it and the Bay or Gulfe hence named; extending southwards on the West side of it till it joines to Sweden, and on the East side till it meet with the Province of Finland. Hence the division of this countrey, into the Eastern, Northern, and Western Bodden; with reference to the situation of it on the Bay aforesaid. The countrey not very plentifull of grain or fruites, but full of great variety of wilde beasts, whose rich skins yeeld great profit unto the Inhabitants; and by reason of the commodious situation on all sides of the Bay, well stored with Fish. Antiently it was part of the possessions of the Finni, but how or whence it had the name of Bodia, or Bodden, or Bodner, I am yet to learn. But whence soever it had the name, certain I am, that from hence the Gulfe adjoining, is called Sinus Bodicus, Bodner Zee, by the Dutch or Germans.
Chief Townes here in are 1 Barkara, in West Bodden betwixt the Bay and a great navigable lake; 2 Gernia, a well traded Emporie at the very bottom of the Bay in North Bodden; 3 Helsingeliac, more North then that, towards the borders of Lapland, and 4 Korldby, in East Bodden, on the bank of the Gulfe, conveniently seated for a town of Trade.
3. FINLAND.
FINLAND hath on the North, Bodia; on the South, the Baltick Sea, or Mare Suevicum: on the East, Sinus Finnicus; on the West, Sinus Bodicus. It is by Munster thought to be called Finland, quasi fine land; quod pulchrior & amanior sit Suecia, because it is a more fine and pleasing countrey than Sweden it selfe. But indeed it is so called from the Finni, or Fenni; a potent Nation who have here dwelt; whose character is thus framed by Tacitus: Finnis mira feritas, foeda paupertas, non arma, non equi, no penates, victui herbae, vestitui pelles, cubile humus, sola in sagittis spes. The Finnes, saith he, are wonderfully barbarous, miserably poore, without Armes, Horse, or Household Goods: Herbs their food, the ground their bed, and the skins of beasts their best apparell, armed onely with their Arrowes, and in them their hopes. A Character which agreeth every way with our present Finlanders, especially those of Scricfinnia, and some parts of Finmarchia, who are not so well reclaimed to civility, as the other are; but very different from that which Jornandes gives them, who living within 400 yeares after Tacitus, before they had much (if any) entercourse with forein Nations, telleth us of them that they were Scanziae Cultoribus omnibus mitiores, more tractable and civill then any of the Inhabitants of Scandia, not excepting the Suethidi themselves. If so, they did deserve to live in so good a Countrey, more plentifull and plaine then Sweden, and neither so hilly nor so moorish.
The principall places in it are 1. Abo, an Archbishops See, situate on the most Southern point of it, shooting into the Baltick. 2 Wiburg, a Bishops See also, whose jurisdiction for the most part is without this Province, on some part of Russia; all Finland being in the Diocese of the Bishop of Abo. A town conveniently seated at the bottome of the Bay or Gulfe of Finland (called Sinus Finnicus in Latine) which divides this Countrey from Livonia: well fortified as the chief Bulwarke of this Kingdome against the Moscovite; and so well garrisoned withall, that the keeping of this town, and Rivallia in the borders of Liefland, doe cost the king of Sweden 100000 Dollars yearly. 3. Udden, on a point or Promontorie of the same Gulfe opposite to Narve, another Garrison of this king, in Liefland. 4. Verma upon the Bodner Zee, 5 Cronaburg, more within the land, at the efflux of a River out of the Lake called Puente, 6 Deckala, on the banks of the great Lake called Hosela. 7 Varta, more northwards towards Lapland: of which last four I finde not any thing ovservable in the way of story.
6 The SWEDISH ISLANDS.
And now at last I come to the Swedish Islands, here and there interspersed in the Baltick Seas, betwixt the Isle of Bornholm which belongs to Denmark, and Liefland or Livonia, appertaining to the King of Poland; the principall of which are 1. Gothia, or the Isle of Gothland, and 2 Insulae Ulandae, or the Isles of Oelandt.
1. GOTHIA, or the Isle of GOTHLAND, is situate over against Colmar, a strong town in the Continent of Gothland; in length 18 Dutch miles, and five in breadth. Of a rich soile, but more fit for pasturage then tillage, yeelding great heards of Cattell, store of game for hunting, plenty of fish, excellent marble, and aboundance of pitch, which it sends forth to other Countreys. There are in it 18 large and wealthy Villages; besides the Haven town of Wisbich, heretofore rich, and of very great trading, as much frequented by the Merchant as most in Europe, but now much decayed, and neither so well peopled, nor so rich as formerly. The trade removed hither from Wollin of Pomerania (destroyed by Waldemar the first of Denmark, anno 1170) made it flourish mightily: the greatest traffick of the Baltick being managed here: but after that by reason of the long and continuall wars betwixt Denmark and Swethland for the possession of this Isle, it became unsafe; the Factorie was transferred unto other places. For being conveniently seated to annoy the Swedes, the Danes have much contended for it, and sometimes possessed it; but at the present is in the hand of the Swethlander. By some conceived to be the Eningia spoken of by Pliny.
2 OELAND, or this Isles of Ulandt, so called in the plurall number because there are many of them, of which this the principall, is situate over against Abo, the chief City of Finland. Of no great note, but that it is commodiously seated to invade or annoy this kingdome; and therefore very well fortified, and as strongly garrisoned: here being the good towns of 1 Viburg, 2 Vames, and 3 the strong Castle of Castrolm.
Besides which Countreys here described, the King of Sweden is possessed of the strong townes of Narve and Rivallia, and Pernow in Liefland; of Kexholm or Hexholm in Corelia, a Province of Russia; with very fair and ample territories appertaining to them: subdued and added to this Crown by John the second, anno 1581. except Rivallia, which voluntarily submitted to Ericus the second King of this present Race, anno 1561. But being these Townes and Territories are not within the bounds of Swethland; we shall deferre further all discourse thereof, to a place more proper.
The first Inhabitants of this kingdome, besides the Gothes and Finni, spoken of already, were the Sitones, and Suiones, mentioned in Tacitus; together with the Phavonae, the Phiraesi, and the Levoni, whom we finde in Ptolemie, placed by him in the East and middle of this great Peninsula. Which being the generall names of some mighty Nations, are by Jornandes branched into lesser tribes, of the Suethans, Theustad, Vagoth, Bergio, Hallin, Liothida, Athelnil, Gaurigoth, Raumaricae, Rauragnicii, Grannii, Aganziae, Unixae, Arochitamii, Enagerae, Othingi, and divers others by him named. But from what root the name of Sweden, Swedes, or Swethland, by which the chief Province of it, the people generally, and the whole kingdome is now called, is not yet agreed on, nor spoken of at all by Munster or Crantzius, which two, (but specially the last) have written purposely of this people. Gaspar Peucerus deriveth them from the Suevi, who antiently inhabited in the North parts of Germanie beyond the Albis; from whom the Baltick sea was called Mare Suevicum: which people hee conceiveth to have beene driven by the Gothes and Daci into this countrey, and by the change of one letter onely to be called Sueci. But this hath no good ground to stand on, though I meet with many others which are more improbable. For when they left those colder countreys, they fell into these parts which are still called Suevia (the Schwaben of the modern Dutch) where we finde them in the time of Caesar. And after, in fatali illa gentium commigratione, when almost all the Northern Nations did shift their seats, we finde such of them as had staid behinde, to have accompanied the Vandals, in their on-fals into Gaul and Spain. Of any expedition of theirs crosse the Baltick seas, ne gry quidem, nothing to be found in more antient Authors. We must therefore reserve the originall of this people either to the Suiones, or the Suethidi, or perhaps to both: both being antiently setled in these Northern Regions. Of the Suiones wee read in the booke of Tacitus inscribed De moribus Germanorum; by whom reported to be strong in men, armour and shipping: and that they were inhabitants of Scandia, appeares by two circumstances in that Authour. 1 That the people were not permitted to weare weapons, quia subitos hostium incursus prohibet Oceanus, because the Ocean was to them a sufficient Rampart; which could not be affirmed of the antient Suevians, but agreeth very well with the situation of this present Countrey, defended by the Baltick, and vast Northern Ocean, from the sudden assaults of any enemy. 2. Because the Sea which hemmed in that people was conceived to be the utmost bound of the World; trans Suiones mare aliud, quo cingi claudique terrarum orbis finis, as his words there are: which wee know to hold good of this Countrey. Adde unto these this passage of the old Annals of the Emperour Lewis the second, where it is told us of the Danes, relicta patria apud Suiones exulabant, that they were banished into the countrey of the Suiones, which cannot so well be understood of any place as of this Sweden; being next neighbour unto Denmark. And 4 that this people both by Munster and Crantzius, are as well called Suiones as Sueci or Suedi: which sheweth what they conceived of their true Originall. Then for the Suethans or the Suethidi, whom Jornandes speaks of in his book De rebus Geticis, they are by him placed in the Isle of Scandia (for such this great Peninsula was esteemed to be by most antient writers.) Now that these Suethidi are no other then the present Swethlanders appeareth 1. by the propinquity of the names; 2 In that he maketh the Finni and Finnaithae, the next neighbours to them; and 3 in that they are affirmed by the same Authour, to have furnished the Romans with rich Furs, and the skins of wilde Beasts, with which commodities this countrey is aboundantly well stored. Now to which of these two Nations, either the Suiones or the Suethidi, those of Sweden are most endebted for their originall, will (I conceive) be no great controversie: the Suethans, and Suethidi of Jornandes, being no other then a tribe of the Suiones, though the greatest and most powerfull of all those tribes: placed therefore in the front to command the rest, and so most like to give the name unto the whole.
Their government was antiently under Kings, affirmed so to be by Tacitus, who telleth us also that they were absolute and free, nullis exceptionibus, non precario jure regnandi, not bound in Covenant with their people, nor holding their Estates at the will of the Subject. But their Historians have gone for Antiquity hereof beyond the story of Brute or the Trojan warre, (beyond which very few of that strain have dared to pretend) as high as unto Magog the son of Japhet; reigning here within 90 years after the flood. But letting passe these dreams and dotages of the Monkish times, certain it is, that sometimes they were under the Danes, sometimes under the Norwegians, sometimes had distinct Kings of their owne, and finally sometimes were comprehended with the Danes and Norwegians, under the generall name of Normans, conducted by one King or Captain upon forain actions. Omitting therefore the succession of their former kings, of whose very being there is cause to make great question; we will begin our Catalogue of them with Jermanicus, wo entertained Harald King of Denmark, and his brother Regenfride, driven out of that kingdome by Gottricus or Godfrey, the Contemporary of Charlemagne, of whose successours Munster giveth us more certainty.
The KINGS of SWEDEN.
1 Jermanicus.
2 Frotho.
3 Herotus.
4 Sorlus.
5 Biornus.
6 Wichsertus.
7 Ericus.
8 Ostenus.
9. Sturbiornus.
10. Ericus II.
11 Olaus.
12 Edmundus.
13. Stinkalis.
14 Halstenus.
15 Animander.
16 Aquinus.
17. Magnus.
1150 18 Sherco 13.
1160 19 Carolus 8.
1168 20 Canutus 54.
1222 21 Ericus III. 27.
1249 22 Bingerius 2.
1251 23 Waldemarus 26.
1277 24 Magnus II. 13.
1290 25 Birgerius II. 23.
1313 26 Magnus III. son to Ericus the brother of Byrgerius was also chosen King of Norwey.
1326 27 Magnus IV. King of Sweden and Norwey, which last he gave in his life time to Hayvin or Aquinus his second son, and after the death of Ericus his eldest son (his designed successour in this Crown) was outed of this kingdome by the practise of
1463 28 Albert Duke of Mecklenburg, son of Euphemia the sister of Magnus the fourth; to the prejudice of Aquinus king of Denmark and Norwey, made King of Sweden, on that quarrell vanquished by Margaret Queen of Denmark and Norwey, widow of Aquinus, anno 1387. to whom desirous of liberty he resigned his Kingdom, and dyed in his own countrey, anno 1407.
1387 29 Margaret Queen of Denmark, Sweden, and Norwey, the Semiramis of Germany, having united the three Kingdomes under her command, caused an Act of State to be passed in Colmar, a chiefe town of Swethland, for the perpetuation of this union unto her successours; the Lawes and Priviledges of each Kingdome continuing as before they were.
1411 30 Ericus IV. Duke of Pomeren, adopted by Margaret, of whose sister Ingelburgis he was descended, was in her life time chosen King of the three Kingdomes, into which he succeeds actually after her decease; but outed of them all by a strong faction raised against him, anno 1439, he dyed in a private estate in Pomeren, anno 1559.
1439 31 Christopher Count Palatine and Duke of Bavier (in title only) son of the Lady Margaret sister of Ericus succeeded in all three Kingdomes. After whose death the Swethlanders being weary of the Danish Government, broke the agreement made at Colmar for the uniting of the three Kingdomes under one Prince, and chose one Carolus Canutus to be their King, anno 1448.
1448 32 Carolus Canutus, one of the meanest of the Nobility, and not long pleasing to the great ones: whose displeasure when he had incurred and feared the consequents thereof, hee gathereth together all the treasure he could, fled unto Dantzick, and there ended his dayes.
1455 33 Christiern King of Denmark and Norwey, called in by a party of the Swedes, and crowned King of Swethland; but outed againe under colour that he had not kept conditions with them: the kingdome governed after that (for a time) by Marshals.
1458 34 John King of Denmark and Norwey, the sonne of Christiern, received king by the Swedes, then overpowered by the Muscovite: but their turne being served they expelled him againe; returning to their former government under Marshals. Of which Marshals (descended from Steno Stur, the Uncle of Carolus Canutus by his Mothers side) there were three in number; viz. Steno, 2 Suanto, and 3 Steno Stur the second, of which the two first dyed naturall deaths, and the last being by Christiern the second slaine in battell, this kingdom was again possessed by the Danes.
1519 35 Christiern II. King of all three kingdome, used his victory so cruelly here, and his subjects so insolently at home; that here he was outed by Gustavus Ericus, and driven out of Denmark by his Uncle Frederick.
1523 36 Gustavus Ericus descended from the antient race of the kings of Sweden, having vanquished and expelled the Danes, was on the merit of that action chosen king of Swethland; which still continueth in his house.
1561 37 Ericus V. sonne to Gustavus 8.
1569 38 John II. brother of Ericus, marryed Catharine the sister of Sigismund the second, king of Poland.
1593 39 Sigismund the sonne of John the second, in the life time of his Father chosen king of Poland, anno 1586. but was dispossessed of the Crown of Sweden, (after a long warre) by his Uncle Charles.
1607 40 Charles II. Duke of Suderman, the youngest son of Gustavus Ericus, and brother of John and Eric, the two former Kings, first governed here as Viceroy for his Nephew Sigismund; but having an aime upon the Crowne (to which he found the Lutherans not very favourable) hee raised up a Calvinian partie within that Realm, according to whose principles he began first to with draw his obedience from his naturall Prince, and afterwards to assume the Government to himselfe: speeding so well in his designe, that after a long war he forced his Nephew to desist from all further enterprises, and made himself king, anno 1607.
1611 41 Gustavus Adolphus sonne of Charles having setled his affaires in Sweden, and made peace with the king of Denmarke, with whom his father was in warre at the time of his death; fell first upon his Cousin Sigismund the King of Poland, from whom hee tooke many places of importance in Prussia and Livonia, and in pursuance of that warre was made Knight of the Garter. Afterwards having setled a truce with him, hee passed into Germanie, then in great danger of being absolutely inthralled to the house of Austria. In which hee prospered so beyond all expectation, that in one yeare hee passed over the Elb, the Rhene, and the Danow (which no Conquerour ever did before): and having twice vanquished the Imperialists led by Tilly, and restored many of the German Princes unto their estates; was in the current of his victories slaine in the battell of Lutzen, Novemb. 1632. his body royally conveyed to Swethland and there interred.
1632 42 Christina sole daughter of Gustavus, of the age of seven yeares, acknowledged Queen of Sweden; the estate governed by the Counsails of the Nobility. After a long warre with variable successe in Germanie, they came at last to this Accord in the treaty of Munster, that shee and her successours Kings and Queens of Swethland, should peaceably enjoy all the Higher Pomeren, with the Isles of Rugia, Wollin, and the Towne of Stetin in Lower Pomerland; the Towne and Port of Wismar in the Dukedome of Mecklenburg; and the whole Bishoprick of Bremen and Verden, and the Prefecture of the Towne of Wilchusen; with the title of Dukes of Bremen, Pomeren, and Verden, Princes of Rugia, and Lords of Wismar; and by those titles have a place, as Princes of the Empire, in all Diets and Assemblies which concerne the publick. By which agreement (if it hold) the Swedes have not onely got a good footing in Germanie, a strong influence upon all the Counsels of the Empire, a dore open for more forces (if occasion bee) and a free passage into the Western Ocean, which before they wanted: but may in time prove absolute Masters of the Baltick sea, and make the Hamburgers, those of Lubeck, and possibly the Kings of Denmark and the Empire it selfe, be at their devotion.
But leaving these things to the doubtfull issue of contingencie, let us next looke upon the forces and Revenues of the Crowne of Sweden, before the time of Gustavus Adolphus, or as hee found it at his succession to that Crowne. For though the Swedes pretend their Kingdome to be elective, especially since the failing of the Royall line in Magnus the fourth and Albert of Mecklenbourg; yet still the eldest son, or next heir succeedeth, unlesse put by, by faction and strong hand, as in the case of Sigismund, and his Uncle Charles. Which Charles so ordered his affaires that having engaged the kingdome in a warre against his Nephew, hee was sollicited at the last to accept of the Crowne: to which he would by no meanes yeeld till a Law was made for the entailing of the same for ever unto his posterity, whether male or female, as an Hereditary Crown. But whether Hereditary or Elective, the King once setled in the Throne is an absolute Monarch: having not onely power to levie taxes on his subjects, as hee seeth occasion, as five, six, seven, eight dollars, or more yearely, upon every housholder, according to the Proportion of his estate; but also to grant a certaine number of Paisants unto such as hee meanes to favour, to bee as subjects and vassals to him, according to his well deserving. And whereas in the constitution of this Government every Parish hath a Landsman or Consul to decide the controversies of the same; as every Territorie hath its Vicount and each Province his Lamen: there lyeth an Appeal from the Landsman unto the Vicount, and from the Vicount to the Lamen; who if they bee supposed not to judge uprightly, then the Appeale lies unto the Counsell, and from the Counsell of Estate to the King himselfe, (in whom is fixed the Soveraignty and DERNIER RESORT) and not unto the King and Counsell, as before in Denmark.
The Forces of this King are either by Sea, or Land. By Sea, hee is Commander wholly of Bodner, and hath a great power in all the rest of the Baltick: being able to set out 70 good Men of Warre; as John the second did in the yeare 1578. seven of which were good Gallions; and all the rest did carry above 50 cast peeces of all sorts; besides many other good Vessels fit for service. And if a Navie of this size will not serve the turne, hee is not onely furnished with timber, cordage, and all other necessaries for the building of Ships, and with good store of Ordinance and Ammunition for present use; but is able to raise upon a sudden 6000 Mariners, and upon little warning as many more: all which hee entertaineth at no other charges in a manner then to finde them victuals, insomuch as John the second before mentioned did use to say, that that which cost the King of Spaine a Million of Crownes, cost not him 100000 Dollars.
For his Land-forces, they may best be estimated by the Trained Bands, (as wee may call them) in every Province: there being in all 32 Vexilles (or Ensignes) of Foot constantly trained and mustered in the severall Provinces; each Vexille comprehending 600 or 700 men, amounting in the totall to 20000 Foot, all in a manner Musketiers, ready to march whensoever the Kings occasion shall so require. And then for Horse there are eleven Cornets in continuall readinesse, for Sweden, and Gothland, and two for Finland, maintained at the charges of those Countries, to which the King may adde at his owne charges, as many more as hee pleaseth. And for an instance of what this King is able to doe, without putting his estates in hazard by drayning them too drye of men to make good his kingdome; wee finde that John the second in his Navie of 70 Ships spoken of before, had above 18000 Land-souldiers, beside Mariners: And in the Army, which Gustavus Adolphus the late King brought into Germanie, there were mustered no fewer at one time then 12000 Horse, and 34000 Foot, all Finnes, and Swethlanders. For the accommodating of which Armies with Artillerie, and the like Engines of war, it is thought that the kings hereof are masters of 8000 great peeces, for the most part brasse, with Mortar peeces and Granadoes in proportion to them.
But that which makes his Land-forces most considerable is their hardnesse in enduring the extremities of winde and weather, insomuch that it is usuall with them to stand Centinell a whole Winters night of 18 houres long without being relieved: their exact Discipline, and obedience to their Commanders, and finally their indefatigable industry in making their owne shoes, Apparrels, stockes for Muskets, and all other necessaries. Which doth not onely make them fit to endure any labour which is put upon them in the warres; but keepes them from idlenesse, and the pride of Mutinies, the ordinary effect in great Armies of sloth and ease. Nor doe they want incouragement on the Kings part neither; who first, gives to every souldier victuals, which hee accompts not in their pay, and that according to his obedience and desert; 2. If a souldier be taken Prisoner, him the King doth usually redeem at his owne charges: and 3 if a souldiers horse be slain under him, the King supplyeth him with another: which makes the souldiers (very sensible of such obligations) exceedingly conformable unto his commands, how dangerous soever they may seem to be.
Finally as for his Revenues they must needes bee great, there being foure wayes allowed him to amasse his treasures. First the Revenues of the Church, consisting before the Reformation of seven Bishopricks and sixty Monasteries, which enjoyed very great possessions; all seized on by Gustavus Ericus, and by him incorporate to the Crowne; excepting onely what is given back to maintaine the Bishops. 2 Mines, which are here of all metalls in very great plenty, except of Gold and Silver, which they have more sparingly; the tenth whereof in all places belongs to the King, and yeelds him such a fair Intrado, that in the yeare 1578. the Kings part out of two or three Mines of Copper onely amounted to 30000 Dollars. 3 Tenths, out of all increase, as Rie, Wheat, Barley, Fish, Oxen, Skinnes, and the like commodities; the summe whereof though not certainly knowne (because the increase is so uncertaine) yet it was once computed that the tenth of the Oxen onely came in one yeare to 18000 Dollars, besides provision for his houshold. 4 And lastly, Customes imposed on Merchandise, and paid in all his Haven Townes for all commodities imported, or exported of what sort soever. Besides all which hee hath his Contributions in all times of warre, power of imposing taxes (though moderately used) as his necessities require: and on the marriage of a daughter, the kingdome is to provide her portion, which of late times hath beene fixed at the certaine summe of 100000 Dollars, besides Plate and Moveables. Out of which severall Items to summe up the totall, it was observed that in the yeare 1578. King John the second, (all charges ordinary and extraordinary being first deducted) did lay up in his Treasurie no lesse then 700000 Dollars: which was a vast summe for those times, considering especially the great charge which the King had beene at that yeare, in furnishing a Navie of 70 sayle, and raising 18000 Land-souldiers, (besides Horse) for defence of his Realme against the Danes. And yet it is conceived by some knowing men that his Revenues would be much greater then they are, if hee did employ strangers to worke the mines, which the Natives doe not husband to the best advantage; and yet are fearfull to discover them to other Nations, upon some jealousies which they are naturally addicted to: or if hee would turne Merchant, and in his owne ships send out Corn and Cordage with Masts and Timber fit for building, and in them bring back salt and other necessaries, which his kingdome wants, setting them at a farre lesse price then now they goe at, and yet gaining very greatly by it too.
The Armes of this Kingdome are Azure, three Crownes, Or.
There are in Swethland Archbishops 2. Bishops 8. Universities but one, viz. Upsal.
And thus much for SWETHLAND.
------

















