A DISCOURSE OF BATHE, AND THE HOT WATERS There.
ALSO, Some Enquiries into the nature of the Water of St. Vincent's Rock, near Bristol; and that of Castle-Cary.
To which is added, A Century of Observations, more fully declaring the Nature, Property, and distinction of the BATHS.
WITH An Account of the Lives, and Character, of the Physicians of Bathe.
------
By THO. GUIDOTT, M.B. Physician There.
------
Virtute vincam Invidiam.
------
LONDON, Printed for Henry Brome at the Gun in St. Paul's Church-yard, the West end, 1676.
Librum hunc dignum judicamus qui Imprimatur Geo. Ent, Praeses. D. Whistler Censor.
CLARISSIMORUM MEDICORUM LONDINENSIUM COLLEGIO CELEBERRIMO SPECIATIM VERO EXCELLENTISSIMO VIRO D.D. GEORGIO ENT EQUITI AURATO PRAESIDI DIGNISSIMO NEC NON SPECTATISSIMO IV. VIRATUI
D. D. THOMAE COX
D. D. DANIELI WHISTLER
D. D. HUMPHREDO BROOKES
D. D. THOMAE FRANCKLAND,
CENSORIBUS DOCTISSIMIS RELIQUISQUE SOCIIS ERUDITIONE INGENIO SAGACITATE INSTRUCTISSIMIS HOC QUICQUID EST NOVI DE THERMARUM BATHONIENSUM NATURA ET VIRIBUS SUBMISSE OFFERTT. G.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, And my Much Honoured Friend, Sr. Edward Greaves Baronet, Fellow of the Colledge OF PHYSICIANS in London, AND Physician in Ordinary TO HIS MAJESTY.
------
Honoured Sir,
THE kind reception you were pleased to afford a small Paper of mine, that had lately the honour to have your Name prefixt, hath given this encouragement to present to your view, a further Collection of Experiments touching the same Subject, relating to the Waters of Bathe, a place you were pleased once to grace with your Practice, and still with your Favours, for which a more than ordinary respect is, in gratitude, your due.
Besides, Considering you have so far favoured my late Enquiries, as to assist me by your presence, and be an Eye-witness of some of the Experiments, and are a sufficient Judge of them all, I could not fix on any fitter than your self, and the Learned Body you have Relation to, to make this Address unto, or give the Trouble of this present Dedication.
It hath caus'd me sometimes not a little to admire, That the Metropolitan Waters of all England, (as I may term Them) to say no more, should lye 2000 years, and it may be much longer, in so narrow a Diocess; for the discovery I have made of many Things relating to Them, (of which in part here is some Account) that were never taken notice of by former Persons, and those few Writers that have Treated of Them, will Justifie the Expression.
The Principles formerly were accounted Sulphur, Copper, Iron, and a little Marcasite; of late, Bitumen, Nitre, and some Sulphur, which last I endeavour to Confirm, with the Addition of many more, which will partly Constitute, and partly evidence the Nature of these Waters: Besides the beneficial discovery of the Rational use of the Bath-waters in Potion, which hitherto having been but as a good Back-Sword, are now become a Single-Rapier, ready to save, and not destroy, unless ill manag'd by a distemper'd hand.
I confess I did not think to have appeared in this Dress, having designed, and in part compleated, as you know very well, something else, that would have better suited with my Condition, the Dignity of the Subject, and the Reputation of These Waters. But finding some hasty Chirurgion that hath already launced what I intended should have had a longer Time to digest, and expecting, as none but in reason must, the Pretences of many others, I found my self oblig'd to appear, though in a careless habit, and in a manner undrest, rather than too much to exercise the Patience, if not justly incur the Censure of those friends, whose kindness shall induce them to give me a Visit.
And although my Nature inclines me rather to a diffidence, than presumption on any thing that is my own, yet I must be so far confident as to believe, that the Existence of Nitre in the Waters of Bathe, so much question'd by some, and my particular Concern, is so fully establisht by the following Experiments, made with my own hands, as to keep those words upright in my late Letter to your self, wherein I assert it to be undeniable. And whoever shall take the pains to satisfie himself in that Particular, as I have done, and shall let me know wherein he is dissatisfied, and can convince me to the Contrary, whom I will assure he shall not find obstinate, he shall have the Honour, if that be any thing, of making me his Convert, (for I think my single Reputation a small Sacrifice on the Altar of Truth;) but if not, it will appear, which is no great matter on either hand, that some Body hath been mistaken.
However the Satisfaction is not little, nor the Omen bad, that I have already gained the Approbation of a Person so Judicious as your self, who have formerly taken pains on the same Account, and on which side soever the Scales shall turn, I have had this opportunity of doing something to oblige my Countrey, as well as acknowledg my self
  Sir,Your most humble and faithful Servant, Tho. Guidott.
A PREFACE TO THE READER.

THat the Reader may be acquainted with the occasion, time, and manner of my making these Enquiries (which are not hasty conclusions, but the product of more mature consideration) I shall here premise something concerning that, and also discourse of, as more pertinent in this place, some other matters tending to the enlargement of the Reputation, and usefulness of the Waters.
Taking therefore into consideration the performances of some before me, and the attempts of others, in my time, which were not satisfactory, and having the advantages of a more retired nature, and constant residence on the place, with those Conveniencies which some others have not had, I thought it worth my while to employ my leisure hours in some Experiments on the Waters, which none had done before to any great purpose, the Waters having hitherto been rather admir'd than understood, if so I might give my own Curiosity satisfaction in that affair. And indeed, no vain glorious humour of desiring to be Popular, which I never affected, nor itch to have my Name in print, which hath been already sufficiently done by the kindness of my friends, and therefore needs not any labour of my own again, was the occasion of my entring on this undertaking; but observing the Bath-water was drank by some, and probably like to advance, I could not satisfie my self in advising my Patients to it, unless I had first made a particular search into what it did contain, it seeming as absurd to me to tell my friends that depended on my judgment for their health and preservation, they should drink the Bath-water, which I knew nothing of, as to advise them to the use of such Spirits, Pills, or any other Medicine, I was ignorant of the composition of, or had procured from others.
Had I found this done to my hand, I could well have dispensed with the confinement and risque this design hath occasion'd, and spent these hours I have done in my Study, as chearfully elsewhere, but finding little satisfaction in what had been before perform'd, I first made collection out of the best Mineral Authors, such as Fallopius, Agricola, Baccius, and others, what was the best way to obtain a Sediment out of any Water, and then how to know of what that sediment did consist, making application of this Theory to the Waters of this place.
Observing then the waies of gaining a Sediment to be chiefly four, Evaporation, Distillation, Precipitation, and Insolation, the last, as too laborious, I thought fit to wave, and resolved on the other three, Evaporating, precipitating, and distilling first small quantities of all the Baths, which gave me encouragement to proceed to greater.
Having obtained a Sediment, which I call the Contents of the Water, the very Notion of which was but lately a stranger here, I trusted not to my single judgment, but made it known to the best Physicians of my acquaintance, with whom I had Converse, particularly my ever honoured friend Sr. Edward Greaves, whose encouragement to this design hath not been little, and also addressed my self in writing to the very Ingenious and Eminent Doctor Willis (whose loss all Ingenious Philosophers and Physicians must lament, his many thoughts now dying with him) whose assistance I desired by Letter dated 1.Sept.--73, in these words:
Sir, 
THe Acquaintance I had the happiness to have with you formerly in Oxon, and the Civilities you have been pleased to confer on me since, with the readiness you have ever exprest of encouraging all ingenious Inquiries, have emboldened me to give you this Interruption. The desire also I understand you have expressed to Mr. Robert Chapman an Apothecary of this City, of a better account of the Contents of these Waters, which hath hitherto I know not how, been too much neglected, and concerning which I have of late made some Experiments, hath further encouraged me only at present to acquaint you, that about Michaelmas next, God willing, I shall have a conveniency by a friend of mine, your Neighbour, to send you the true Contents of all the Baths apart, which if you please to examine, and honour me so far as to return me your thoughts of the Ingredients, being doubtless a Compounded body, I shall with all alacrity and obsequiousness imaginable give you a larger account of my Observations, vvhich I forbear to do till you please to favour me with an Answer, that so I may not preoccupy your more exact enquiry. The thing it self being of so grand import, and so well suiting with your own genius, I may promise my self the greater happiness in your Correspondence, &c. which is all the trouble shall at this time be given by 
Your most humble Servant, T.G.According to this Letter, I sent the Doctor what I promised, on the 15. of October next ensuing, by my facetious, learned, good friend, Mr. Alexander Dyer, with this Letter, which because it contains the rude draught of what I afterwards took more pains about, and not much different from what I now publish, I shall here insert.
Honoured Sir,
HEaring nothing of Colonel Morgan, the Person I designed for conveyance of what I formerly promised, I have now met with a convenient opportunity by my vvorthy friend Mr. Alex. Dyer to present you with as true an Anatomy of the Baths, as my present inspection will permit: viz. The Contents of all the Baths, Kings, Cross, and Hot, in Iron and Glass Vessels; the former ouncei. of each, the latter ounceii. or thereabouts; that in Glass being all that one Gallon of the Water of each Bath did afford; the other in Iron, not the whole quantity, but sufficient, I hope, for your satisfaction, that came from four Gallons, the Kings Bath yielding in Iron, on my first Experiment dramxiiii; the Cross dramxii ss; the Hot ounceix. scrupleii: but on my second Trial performed in the late wet weather, much less out of the same vessel, and quantity of water, which may suggest something to Enquiry if I find it hold. But usually out of 4 Gallons in a Vessel of mixt Mettal, I commonly evaporate it in, I have ouncei. out of a gallon of all the Baths alike, so that I judge about dramii. to be the common proportion out of a gallon the Water will afford.
Now of these dramii, as I suppose, you will easily discover all is not Salt, but according to my best observation I find a third part only Saline, or scrupleii. in dramii: the residue, which I have sent under the name of Residuum Sedimenti non Salinum, will not relent but continues in a gritty nature, and I suppose, consists of two different substances.
The Ochre ariseth in a large quantity, where the stream of the Bath meets with any resistance; but what I am not so fully satisfied in for the present is, that though so much continually is breathed out of the water, nothing yellow is discovered in the Contents.
The Oleum Salis Thermarum per deliquium, is only that Salt I have sent you by the name of Sal Thermarum relented in the air, and cleansed from impurities that will subside, but tincted greenish by a touch of Copper it met with in extracting, when otherwise the true colour is more inclining to Amber.
One thing more also I think fit to advertise you of, that in Glass Vessels there is a thin crust in the outside covering that part that is most Saline, as thin as the thinnest Wafer, but not Salt at all, which I have caused to be separated in the Contents of the Hot Bath, and put in a distinct glass containing drami. gr. 10; this more flakey and much less, if at all Saline, being only scrupleii. gr. 14. The Kings and Cross Bath are alike, mixed here in one glass, only the Hot Bath separated for your further satisfaction.
You have also the Sand, Mud, and Scum, in Boxes by themselves, all which I submit to your more exact scrutiny what names to call these by, which is the grand thing in question, and on which will be built, as I conceive, the truest Hypothesis of the Nature and Vertues of these Waters that hath yet been given, and much different from what hath hitherto been supposed and presumed on.
I hope to have the honour of a few lines from you, what your thoughts are of the nature of these particulars, vvhich vvill be very acceptable to  Sir, Your obliged humble Servant, THO. GUIDOTT.Postscript.
IN an ordinary infusion of any of the Contents in Common Water, you will observe a white gritty substance, which will harden into a stone in the bottom of the glass, one of which I have sent in the Box containing Sedimentum non Salinum; above that a blewish light, and more dirty substance; then the Salt in the Water to which it gives a yellow tincture.
The Doctors business being much on other accounts, I cannot understand he did any thing in this, only in a Latin Letter he had occasion to write me not long after, on the account of an Honourable Patient, for whom we then were both concern'd he takes a very kind notice of my Letters, and Experiments, and gives me thanks in this expression, Clarissime Domine, Multum Tibi debeo pro Litteris & Experimentis Tuis circa Aquas Thermales mihi jam pridem missis, quae officia Tua ut gratissima habeo, ita compensare studebo; but sent me no other satisfaction.
A little after, having an opportunity of obtaining the Contents of many Hogsheads of the Water, I wrought them all of, and came to an exact separation and distinction of Particulars, as expressed in the Observations hereunto annexed, and as occasion served, communicated my Experiments to my Honoured friends, the Learned and accomplisht Sr. Charles Scarborough, Doctor Thomas Witherley, Dr. Nathaniel Highmore, and Dr. Thomas Harbech. This I think is sufficient to take off the surmise of Singularity, if any such thing by chance should be thought upon.
And here I cannot but admire how a Judicious man should be so far imposed on by any person whatsoever, as to imagine, that a satisfactory enquiry into the nature of these Waters was so nice a speculation, as to be inconvenient or useless [according to these words; I have been desirous heretofore to have attempted some discovery of our Baths, according to those Principles: but being thought (by some) either not convenient, or not useful, I was willing to save my labour, which perhaps might have seemed not to be worth thanks.] (Jord. Nat. Bath, c. 17. in fin. p. 147.) For, what can be more necessary, and therefore useful and convenient too, than to know the Principles of any Water we recommend our Patients to? and what did all the Mineral Writers that treated of such Waters before him whose authority he uses, but either make such enquiries, or speak by guess? and which of these two is the more useful or convenient, is easily determin'd.
Besides, by this means we act as rational Physicians, and free the Baths and Mineral Waters from that aspersion they labour under, of being accounted Empirical Medicines, whereas they are the exact composition of the best Physician, and perform their operations by virtue of the Ingredients they consist of, and the blessing of God Almighty, as all other good Medicines and Prescriptions do.
Morever, this way we can better judge of the reason of the effects, which without this, perplex the understanding with an ignorant admiration, and we prove no better than the ordinary Spectators at a Puppet-play, who admire the motions, but know nothing of the hand within that occasions them.
I confess indeed, his thinking his pains might not have deserved thanks, might somewhat discourage him; but a man of Resolution would have considered that things of this kind, subjected to publick view, would fall either into the hands of understanding, generous and unbiast persons; or else ignorant, selfinterested, and narrow Souls: the former ever have been, and will be ever ready to give what encouragement ingenuity shall deserve; and for the other, they are not much to be regarded, being best brought to a knowledge of themselves by an understanding of their errors; and as their mouths are no slanders, so their thanks are but slender, if any, commendations. And thanks be to God for it, there have been and now are many worthy, brave, and generous Spirits in this our Nation, who can discern and make distinction 'twixt things that differ, else bad would be the condition of those that have broken through that opposition at which others have boggled, and think it no disparagement to undergo rude Censures from the ruder multitude, in prosecution of a design for publick advantage.
Although the Credit of the Waters hath been preserved by Bathing, and advanced by Drinking, especially these two Summers last past, yet a far greater degree of Reputation may be acquired, by a more particular account of the more remarkable Cures that are annually wrought, principally thereby; which being digested into the nature of a Register, would mightily conduce to the satisfaction of those that seek remedy here in the like distempers. And although I have endeavoured what in me lay to promote so necessary a good work, yet such is the stupidity of some to things of their own advantage, that nothing of this nature hath yet been performed, although recommended by the learned Doctor Jorden, then practising on the place, and often inculcated, though with like success, by my self: (N.B. Ch. 18. in fin. p. 163) So that to the wonderful honour of those on whom it must reflect, the Waters have been more beholding to the gratitude of Forreigners in registring their own Cases, than to the care and duty of those that are at home. I shall instance in the Case of Sr. Humphrey Lloyd, who having received a hurt in his Hip, by the kick of a horse in Milain, was grievously afflicted with a Sciatica for a twelve months time, and after having made use of much Physick, from several Physicians, to little purpose, in only six daies using these Waters was perfectly recovered. His words are these; (Fragm. Descr. Brit. p, 16.) Alia Belgarum urbs, Ptolomaeo, Aquae Calidae; Antonino, Aquae Solis; Britannis, Caer Badon; & Anglis, Bathe dicitur, Balneis Aquarum Calidarum saluberrimis clara; Cujus rei ego certissimus testis esse possum. Nam cùm ex ictu equi Mediolano, in Italia, excepto, dolore Schiatico duodecim continuis mensibus laborarem, diversisque Doctissimorum Medicorum auxiliis non convalescerem, his Balneis, cum tantum sex diebus usus essem, sanitati pristinae restitutus sum.
And that I may mention one fresh in the memory of all, whose gratitude in this kind deserves a remembrance, Mr. John Revet, an aged man, hath very lately publickly testified his cure of an Hemiplegia, in a months bathing, by an Inscription round a very fair Brass ring, on the right hand of the Entrance into the Queens Bath out of the Kings, after this manner; Thanks to God. I John Revet his Majesties Brazier, at 56 years of age, in this present month of July 1674, in this place recovered a cure of health and limbs, of the Dead Palsey, on one side, from head to foot.
That this way of Registring of Cures was also thought necessary, and recommended before the time of Dr. Jorden may appear from the words of Mr. Jones, an honest Cambrobritan (whose authority I am constrained to make often use of in the following discourse, in regard he is the only man that hath treated any thing largely of these Waters,) which I recite as they are, being the plain words of an honest meaning man. I wish, saith he, that you leave a Note of the Commodity received, and a knowledge of your condition and calling in the Records of the Mayor of the City, where it shall be registred, until a Physician be appointed, who then shall be joyned with the Mayor, paying to the Poor-man's Box, and 4 pence for Registring your benefit received there. (Bathes Aid, lib. 4. fol. 33.) [And in another place;] (Buxtons Benefit, fol. 22.) Alway provided the day of your coming thither be noted before you enter into the Baths, and the day of your departure, with the Country of your habitation, condition, or calling, with the Infirmities or cause you came for, in the Register book kept of the Warden of the Bath, or the Physician that there shall be appointed, and the benefit you received, paying four pence for the Recording. This Register may be so contriv'd as that the Patients name, or only letters thereof, as shall be thought expedient, with thir place of residence, distemper, and time of using the Waters, may be exprest in short; a model whereof, in many instances, we have in Jo. Bauhinus de Aquis Bollensibus, lib. 1. cap. 17.
And whereas mention is here made of the Poorman's Box, it gives me a good occasion to remind this Age, of what prudent and charitable disposition the former Age was, in which for the necessary support of the many Poor that came hither for relief, (now sufficiently numerous, and burthensom too) Reparations and Conveniences of the Bath, and other good uses, a Tax, or Pole-bill was made, and willingly consented to by the users of such Waters, by which a certain reasonable rate, or sum, was required of every man or woman of all conditions, from a Duke to a Yeoman, by which all Clamours, now too frequent, were prevented, and all occasions of Exactions taken away, no person paying, or requiring more than what was commonly known to be their due, reserving their Gratuities to dispose of as they please. The mony collected to be put into the Treasury of the Bath, and intrusted in the hands of one or two honest and sufficient persons, who should every Michaelmas give up their Accounts, and dispose of good part of the mony chiefly to the use of the poor abroad that come with good Certificates, or accounts of their condition, to be approved of by competent Judges in this case, and other necessary, good, and charitable uses, as shall be thought requisite; provided the Baths, Pumps, or any of their appurtenances be supply'd, and kept in good order and repair. And this was never intended in any violent or compulsory way, but only as a fair proposal to the better disposed persons, who by their good example, and readiness to comply in this particular, may have an efficacious influence on the more captious and excepting, to beget in them a better understanding of this charitable, and orderly design.
Neither can this Tax in reason be imagin'd to be prejudicial to the Waters, as some others are reported to have been; on the imposition of which the Waters are said to have lost their virtue: for however the truth of such stories may be admitted, which are deliver'd by credible Authors, and I cannot contradict, yet certain it is, that if any such thing ever happen'd, it was either on the restraint of a publick resort, by denying Poor people the use of the Waters, or else by an Impost collected by the Officers of the Prince to his private advantage; whereas this is only to prevent exactions, and moral abuses, between man and man, and the Poor rather hence to be relieved than exacted of, with a probability of a much greater resort that will be procured by a reasonable demand, and good order withal.
The overplus of this Collection, if rightly manag'd, and the years prove lucky, may in a short time, make a purse for the covering one or two of the Baths also, whereby the Waters would be rendred useful all the year, which by reason of the coldness of the ambient Air, and fear of injury thereby, and no other, are thought not so fit to be used in the Winter season, the Waters then being as effectual as in Summer.
And this would be agreeable to the use and custom of most of the Baths in Europe which are cover'd, and thought by the best Physicians to be a means of keeping the Waters to an even Temper, being an equal defence against the wind and cold of the Winter, and the troublesom heat of the Sun in Summer; so that nothing external causing alteration supervening, the benefit of the Waters may be safely received from the first of January, to the last of December, which would be much for the relief of those infirm persons that require a longer stay than ordinary here, and by their so long absence from the Bath, do but weave Penelope's web, undoing in the Winter, what is done in Summer; whereas if they did in this manner, as we say, follow their blows, they probably would not only prevent a relapse, but set themselves in a way of perfect recovery with one resolution, without many comings at several seasons, being many times not so well at their second coming, as they went away on their first season of bathing.
For this use I think the Queens Bath most convenient, both in regard it is but small, and also more especially for the conveniences of the Slips, and Houses about it, where it is almost no more than out of Bath, into Bed; and if well cover'd, and care taken in rising, may be as well as if a man made use of a Bath in his own house or Chamber where he lies. After which the Cross Bath may follow, if it be thought fit, the Kings, and Hot, being kept open still.
But against this I foresee two Objections will be made. First, That it will be inconvenient in the Summer time to sit so close, if no offence doth arise from the steam. And, Secondly, That it will be injurious to the Lights about the Bath.
To the first, I answer generally; That those persons that desire good, will think nothing an inconvenience that is in order to it, and those that come for pleasure may be somewhere else; yet that it may appear to be made out some other way, I suppose the increase of Heat, which sometimes that Bath wants, procured by keeping the Air out, and the steam in great measure in, (which yet will not be more than will well be endured) will make a sufficient recompence for this supposed molestation. And as for the Steam, a vent hole, or Tunnel at the top, will so discharge, that it may not be offensive or troublesome at all.
As to the Lights, the Cross Bath will certainly inconvenience none, and the Queens may be so contriv'd, if made flat, as to do the same but if built more erect for gaining room below, there will be but a very little blind, or perhaps none at all, to the lower Windows on the Hart lodging side, which house, by reason of the accommodation of the Slip thereunto belonging, being, in all probability, likely to partake most of the profit, may contribute a little in this kind. But to avoid all exception, the Cover may be so made with shutters on a Timber frame, that it may be easily taken off if there be occasion, and as soon closed up again, if necessity shall require.
One thing more I shall only add, which as a means to establish greater order and content, with submission to more political judgments, I here propose, That I conceive that the persons having dependance more immediately on the Bath, may be better paid by Salaries, than the Numquam-satis-arbitrary way now on foot; That their number may be lessen'd, being by that reason, and (the consequent thereof) their necessity, only such as repine at now, and prey one upon another; and that two Serjeants, four able men to manage the Pumps, and cleanse the Baths, four Women to introduce and place the Females; with twelve Chair-men, may be sufficient. The Salaries to be paid them by the Officer in chief, collected by the Serjeant, and raised by a moderate demand by the Pole from the Users of the Waters, according to their conditions, quality, and time of stay at the Bath, expressed in a Table for that purpose mentioned before; and if any other clamorous demands, uncivil deportment, neglect, or want of duty, should at any time happen in those Servants, upon complaint made, to be animadverted on, suspended, or discharged by the Authority under which they are. These things some may make light of, but the Prudent will consider.
T. G.
------
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Introduction, 
Chap. II. The Opinion of a late Author concerning the Nature of the Baths of Bathe, 
Chap. III. An Examination of some particulars in the former Chapter, 
Chap. IV. Of Nitre in the Bath-water, 
Chap. V. Of Sulphur in the Bath-water, 
Chap. VI. Of Vitriol in the Bath-water, 
Chap. VII. A further proof and illustration of former particulars, 
Chap. VIII. A Letter formerly written to Sr. E. G. 
Chap. IX. Of the Antiquity of the Baths and City, 
Chap. X. Of the Roman Antiquities in Bathe, 
Chap. XI. Of the Abbey Church in Bathe, 
Chap. XII. Of the Baths of Bathe, 
Chap. XIII. Of the use of the Bath-water in Potion, 
Chap. XIV. Of the vertues of the Bath-water taken inwardly, 
Chap. XV. Of the Water of St. Vincents Rock near Bristol, 
Chap. XVI Of Castle-Cary Water. 
A Century of Observations, 
The Lives and Character of the Physicians of Bathe, 
two page pictorial map of Bath

A Discourse of BATHE, AND THE HOT WATERS There.
------
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
HAving formerly, in the year 1668, annexed a brief discourse of Bathe to one of Doctor Jorden's of Natural Bathes and Mineral Waters, under the name of an Appendix concerning Bathe, by which and some other pains I had taken about the Treatise it self, I thought I had obliged (as was the opinion of most) not only the Relations of the deceased Author, but all his Friends and Well-wishers; but meeting, contrary to all expectation, with rude and unhandsom returns from an Impudent person, to whose Temper the modest Doctour was a great stranger, and of whose behaviour he would be much asham'd, were he now alive; who on his pretended relation hath repaid me with ill language, and foolishly threatned me with Trouble for my good will. Now to put an end to all disputes of this kind, I have thought fit to appeal to any understanding person, that hath his senses exercised, and his wits about him, (for all have not, and some have none at all) whether my Additions have been any impair to the Doctor's Reputation, whom I have treated with all the Civility imaginable; and for the Sale of the Book (a good argument of its acceptance) I believe there were not more sold in the Doctor's life time, of what he printed himself, than went off the first year of my Impression. But to silence all Cavils and silly Objections of this nature, I have discharged that Author, and published in this discourse my own thoughts and Observations, and how much different they are from his, or agreeable to Truth, may best be determin'd by the ingenious Reader.
I did intend indeed, according to my Promise in the end of my Preface to the Editon of Dr. Jorden, to have amplified that small discourse into an History of Bathe; but finding no encouragement since to that design, and many things that have made me alter my resolution, my intentions are to wave that, and apply my self, in some convenient time, to the Roman Court, where I shall have a fairer Trial, and more Justice done me. In the mean time, I hope this may in some measure stop the gap, and release me of my obligation to the Candid world; especially considering that the Antiquities of the Baths and City can hardly, I think, be improved higher, and the Mystery of the Sacred Waters of Minerva, is not to be profan'd, which it wants little of if idly prostituted to vulgar Capacities; which, besides that they are incompetent Judges in other matters, are apt to put a sinister interpretation on those very things, that really are, and were so intended for their own advantage; neither had I published the Observations I now do in this language, had it not been on a more particular account.
The ill Usages and great Indignities I have already met withal, from an ungrateful people, in the prosecution of my design of making further Enquiries into the Nature of those Waters, are not here to be mentioned; they are sufficiently known to be products of Envy and Malice, and as I have hitherto contemned what pitiful opposition could be made against me by the united strength of Envy, Pride, Beggery and Revenge; so I shall not surcease my Thoughts in due time of performing that which will be better esteem'd by more Judicious persons, and render me and my design most acceptable when best understood. It was a fit return of a grave Divine to a vainglorious opposer of his good Inclinations, Nec propter Te coepi, nec propter Te desinam. Thou, Satan, said he, hast nothing to do with my Concerns, for thou art at neither end of my design; and as I did not begin to do thee a kindness, so I will continue notwithstanding thy rage. Such unclean Spirits have no more to do with publick affairs, than to interrupt the quiet of better than themselves; and are like a troublesom Curr on the Road, that doth little else, with a besom tail and a whiffling bark, than make a man well mounted look back, his horse kick, and so returns.
It hath ever been the fate of New Discoveries to meet with Course entertainment at their first appearance; and whereas men are usually courteous and civilly demean'd to strange Persons, they treat strange Opinions and new Inventions at another rate. 'Tis the only Policy accounted to keep a ballance among men, and if any one by a more than ordinary industry and God's blessing on it, hath made at any time a conquest in the Intellectual world, whereby 'tis thought he may get the start of his Neighbours, a rotten Cabal shall make head against him, and perhaps, use him with as much severity as a forceable Intruder on another's right; whereas the Secrets of Nature are free to all, and the Victor here enters not by Blood, and Rapine, and Tyrannical oppression, but in a way both innocent in it self, and advantagious to others.
When I reflect on the hard measure the Renowned Dr. Harvey met withal from the pride and peevishness of some conceited Brethren (who esteem nothing Currant but what bears their image and superscription, if not minted in their own brain) on his first demonstration of the Circulation to the World, I cannot but conclude, if I had no other instance for it, That neither Ingenuity, Learning, Modesty, nor any thing that is good and truly valuable can give protection from, though a sufficient antidote against, the poyson of Envy, Envy, that spreading Ring-worm, that Ubiquitarian infection, that Canker of what is found, and Rust of what is bright! to be found almost in all places, in Town and in Country, in the Shop and in the Street, in the Tavern and in the Ale-house; it hovers over all, and pitches where it can, till at last, if it hurt not others, it preys upon it self:
Thou wicked Fiend! that ne'r didst good,
But hast perversly it withstood,
And ever will, till Time shall be
No more, or We
Be rid of Thee.

But to pass by things of this nature with that of the unconcerned Graecian to as abusive persons, Exesti klazomenois aschemonein; or that of Tacitus, Convitia spreta exolescunt, the best answer being nothing at all; I shall rather chuse to acquaint the Reader, That whereas I conceive, when I writ my Letter of Observations, that Bitumen and Sulphur were not primarily concern'd in the Body of the Waters, and therefore no way observable in the Contents; by fresher Experiments and Observations of a later date, I am inclin'd to believe, that Sulphur is one ingredient in the Contents of the Waters, though not proportionable in quantity to the Salts, and lost in the bringing them to a better colour. For if two or three ounces of the Contents, which at first much resemble the courser sort of Sugar, be put into a Crucible in order to fusion, when the Crucible is red, and before the Salt doth run, there is the perfect colour and smell of Brimstone, insomuch that it may be sensibly discerned in any part of the room, and as the Salt draws nearer the state of Fusion, the Sulphur wasts and is diminished; so that as dross or Recrement it burns off in Calcination, and is no way concerned in the refined Salt, though one Ingredient in the Waters, and contained in their body.
I shall further add, that I made a Lixivium of the Salt calcin'd before fusion, when probably the Sulphurous parts, or so reputed, were not all consum'd, and observ'd so great a foetor in the Lixivium representing Sulphur so effectually to my smell, that it presently obtain'd the Testimony (if that be any thing) of that sense.
CHAP. II. The Opinion of a late Author concerning the Nature of the Baths of Bathe.
AND here I cannot but take notice of a Novel Writer, who Magisterially thus determines: (Joh. Mayow LL. D. & Med.) Quod ad Nitrum & Sulphur attinet, quibus Thermas Bathonienses imbutas esse hactenus creditum est, eorum neutrum Aquis Thermarum istarum solutum esse arbitror: As to what concerns Nitre and Sulphur, with which the Bathes of Bathe have hitherto been thought to be impregnated, I suppose there is nothing of either of them dissolved in the Waters.
A bold assertion! which had it been vented and believed but 50 years ago, would have prevented much trouble in evincing the contrary; but, since 'tis in fashion to be peremptory, I do assert, That both Nitre and Sulphur are to be found in all the Bathes of Bathe, and that dissolved in, and mixed with, the Body of the Waters. In order to the Proof of which, I shall take some account of the forementioned Author's 15th. Chapter of his Tract of Sal-Nitre, the arguments he hath against it, and his opinion of the contrary.
His words therefore, as well as I can translate them, are these:
"Among the most celebrated Bathes, we may justly reckon those of Bathe, in which admirable Waters, a continual Vestal and sacred Fire is maintain'd , as if things of a most different nature were interleagu'd. Before I come to the manner how these Bathes receive their Heat, it will not be improper if I make some enquiry into the Contents of these Waters.
It is therefore manifest, that the Bathes of Bathe are impregnated with a certain Salt of an acid nature, for if any Salt alkali, or volatil Salt purely salin'd, be mixed with these Waters, a precipitation will ensue, and the Waters will become turbid, and of a milky nature.
Moreover, The Bathe-water powred on boyling Milk, will coagulate it, as any other acid doth.
Neither doth this acid Salt seem to be the only Salt of the Bathe, but is complicated with an Alkali; for if the Water be evaporated quite away, a certain Salt of a more fixt nature will be found in the bottom of the vessel, which, on the powring of any acid on it, will ferment.
Of the same nature also are the Mud and Sand of the Bathe, which are wrought up with the Springs; for any acid liquor being powred on them, an Ebullition will follow.
There may be also observed in these Waters a Salt, or rather a Lime-Chalk kind of Earth, sticking to the bottom of the Gouts, or passages, almost in all places where the Water passeth.
From what hath been said may be collected; That the Bathes of Bathe are impregnated with a certain acid saline Salt, and the Salt of the Bathe seems not much unlike Tartar vitriolated, or Aluminous Salt.
The Reason why these Salts destroy not one another, but each of them ferments with its contrary Salt; may be understood from what hath been delivered in the former Chapter: To wit; These Salts are so imperfect, that in Conjunction they cannot destroy one another. But more of these Salts, hereafter.
As to Nitre and Sulphur, with which the Bathes have hitherto been thought to participate, I suppose, That neither of them is dissolv'd in those Waters.
That there is no Nitre in the Waters appears by this, That the Salts that remain after the Evaporation of the Bathe-water, put on a Coal, burn not, as Nitre doth. Although I shall not deny, that those immature Salts of an Alkali nature, (which are also contained in the Sand, and  Mud of the Bathe (If that be meant by Fimus in the Author, to express which, Limus or Lutum had been more proper.)) being expos'd sometime to the air, may, perhaps, by its influence be converted into Nitre.
As to Sulphur, which hath been so much reported to be in all Bathes, 'tis not, I believe, dissolved in these Waters. Because,
If a Solution of Alom, Vitriol, or any other Salt, whether acid, or fixt, be mixed with the Water of the Bathe, Sulphur discovers not it self to be precipitated, either by a fetid smell, or any other sign; which notwithstanding in the Solution of Sulphur in the water of unflak't Lime, or made into a Lixivium, doth appear, where the Sulphur by the affusion of any acid Liquor is precipitated.
I am not ingorant that the Water of these Bathes, if Salt or Tartar, or a purely volatil Salt, be cast into it, will presently turn white, as is declared before; which colour proceeds not from Sulphur, but a stony, or Aluminous matter precipitated, not much unlike to what is observed in the Water of unflak't Lime, when any fixt Salt is mixed therewith; in which notwithstanding it is not supposed the Sulphur is dissolved; for if Sulphur be boyled in Water of unflak't Lime, the Water becomes white, not by the affusion of a fixt Salt, as before, but of an acid; so that fixt Salts may dissolve Sulphur, but not precipitate it. Wherefore if Sulphur be contained in the Waters of Bathe, they would be precipitated, not by a purely saline, as formerly, but an acid Salt, and the Sulphur so precipitated would discover it self by a fetid smell, which it doth not do.
To which I add, That an acid Salt, or something Aluminous, doth seem to predominate in the Bathes aforesaid, so that they become altogether unfit to dissolve the Sulphur.
Moreover, If Common Sulphur be boyled in those Waters, they are never tinged with a yellow or Sulphurous colour, neither can Sulphur, by any means, be precipitated from the decoction, as I have often experimented.
And therefore I much admire the famous Willis, in his Treatise of the heat of the Blood, should affirm, That Sulphur boyled in Bathe-water may be dissolved after the same manner, as if boyled in Water of unflak't Lime.
Now if Sulphur seems to be dissolved in the Waters aforesaid, the occasion of the mistake, I suppose to be, That the decoction was made in a vessel, in which some fixt Salt had been decocted, so that the Solution of the Sulphur may be made by some particle of a fixt Salt, with which the vessel might be season'd.
Concerning the Baths of Bathe, 'Tis the common Opinion that Silver dipped into them is coloured yellow, in the same manner as if it were cast into a Solution of Sulphur, and hence it is supposed that the Baths have Sulphur in them; but experience evinceth the contrary; for Silver put into the Bath-water becomes not reddish, or yellow, but rather black.
The mistake may seem to arise from this, That 'tis customary with the Bathe-Guids to tinge, and as it were guild over pieces of Silver with a Salino-Sulphurous Mud, or Dung, such as is often found in houses of Office, and put them off to Strangers, for a little profit, as if they were coloured with the Bathe-water.
And here this is to be noted, That a kind of Bituminous Mud, with a small pittance of Common Sulphur, is brought up with the Springs, which only swims on the top, or else continues at the bottom, but never is dissolved in the Waters themselves.
Neither is Sal Armoniack, as some imagine, to be found in the Waters; for if on the Solution of Sal Armoniack, Salt of Tartar be injected, the purely saline volatil Salt (of which Sal Armoniack in part doth consist) being at liberty from the acid Salt, to which it was formerly united, will presently fly off into the air, and will quickly be disover'd by a pungent affecting the nostrils, which is never observ'd in the Bathewaters.
Lastly; As to Vitriol, the Crosse and Hot Bathe seem to have none at all; for if Galls are beaten, and infused in these Waters, they neither turn purple nor black; which would certainly be, if these Waters had Vitriol in them.
The King's Bathe seems to have a little Vitriol in it; for if some beaten Galls are cast into that Water, it will have a light tincture of a black purple colour.
'Tis also to be noted, That a certain  Mineral (Minera, for Minerale, is corruptly, though Chymically, used here) of a Metallick nature, ariseth out of the Earth, with the Springs of the Bathe, which is easily turn'd into Vitriol. For if any acid liquor be affused on the Sand (which breaking out with the Springs, is found in the bottom of the Bathe) it being corroded with an acid Menstruum, not without a remarkable effervescence, will in part be converted into Vitriol, just as it happens to the filings of Irons corroded with an acid liquor.
For if that Sand of the Bathe corroded with an acid liquor, be put into the Infusion of Galls, the liquor acquires an atropurpureous colour. Whereas if the Infusion of Galls be put on the Sand newly taken out of the Bathe, and not corroded with an acid liquor, it will, by no means, be of a purple colour; an apparent sign, that the Metallick Sand of the Bathe, unless corroded with an acid Menstruum, doth not turn to Vitriol.
It is further observable; That the Sand of the Bathe kept some time, and exposed to the open air, will of its own accord, be converted into Vitriol; for if that Sand be mixed with the Infusion of Galls, the Water will contract an atropurpureous appearance.
Moreover, If it be laid on the Tongue, it hath a perfect Vitriolick taste; and no wonder, for the Nitro-aereous Spirit, after some time, closeth with the Metallick Mineral, and SalinoSulphureous Marchasite, of which Vitriol useth to be made, mixed in the Sand, and causeth it to ferment, and at last, as was shewed before, converts it into Vitriol, &c."

CHAP. III. An Examination of some Particulars in the former Chapter.
HOW far this Author hath ploughed with my Heifer, I leave to the consideration of those that have been any way acquainted with my design; and shall only here take notice, what Observations are agreeable with, or different from those I have often made with the greatest exactness, and repeated Trials, submitting all to the unbiast judgment of Indifferent persons.
And first of all, I concur with him, that the Baths of Bathe are in part impregnated with a certain Salt of an Acid nature; but why this acid Salt should be called Aluminous, I am not yet so fully resolv'd, as much on other accounts, so somewhat on this, That although an acid Spirit be in Alom, yet the most perceptible taste is either acerbe or austere; which being not observed in these Waters, I have so much reason to judge Alom not predominant, as asserted here.
The Experiment he mentions of precipitation or alteration of the Waters to a milky colour, or almond Milk, we owe to the Ingenuity of the Industrious Mr. Stubbe, who, though he had not the good hap to discover what was precipitated, yet gives it the general name of an insipid Magistery, and is nothing else but Freestone finely wrought, and intimately mixt with the body of the Waters. (Pl. ult. red. To a Nonpl. p. 135.)
If any blame me for calling it by so homely a name, I desire they would consider, that I had rather call it so than a Metallick Mineral, or a Salino-sulphureous Marchasite, supposing it more agreeable to all their apprehensions that will be concern'd in things of this nature, and whom I would not have abused with hard names and uncouth expressions; the effect of Ostentation, or sanctuary of Ignorance.
That this is Freestone appears by this, that 'tis insipid, gritty, scowrs, leaves a white colour like Chalk on the fingers after it, and is inclinable to an union into a stony consistence.
That this is not Calx vive, or any lapis Calcarius that holds affinity with it, I am much induced to believe from this, That neither the Insipid magistery, nor the more gritty powder, being nothing different but in fineness and colour, will, either alone or together, open the body of Sulphur, which is usual with Calx vive, as I have fully experimented by decocting two parts of the powders with one of Sulphur in a proportionable quantity of Water, which gave the water very little alteration, and as little was precipitated. (See Obs. 83) To make it further evident, I calcin'd a large Crucible of it with as strong a fire as could well be given, yet nothing quick or limy did appear, but dead and gritty ashes, which, mixed with water, neither made it white, nor created any disturbance. But more of this in what will follow.
That the Bath-water will coagulate milk, I confess, but not as any other acid liquor doth; for this doth is sooner upon affusion, and makes a hard curd; that with the Bath-water, must boyl again and that pretty smartly, else a soft white Curd, as commonly it is, will not appear.
I also agree with the forementioned Author in this, That there is a considerable quantity of an  Alkalizate Salt (Under this Notion, I take the liberty to understand Common Salt, or Sal Marine, consonant to the proper notation of the word: for the Salt of Kali or Glassewort is Marine, though used indifferently by the Chymists for the fixt Salt of any Vegetables, by Calcination.), mixed with some other Salt in the body of the waters, and apparently distinguishable by the taste, as well in a Lixivium made of the Contents of the waters, as in both the Courser part, the result of the Evaporation, and also the purer part, when made white and refin'd; and that this Alkali doth constitute good part of the Saline matter, with which the Baths are impregnated.
For I am apt to believe, that great part of the acidity is breath'd off in evaporation, either in the Bath or over the fire, or both ways together, in regard very little of that taste is perceptible in the Salt extracted, but the Saline is easily discover'd. To the confirmation of which the acting also of acids on it may somewhat conduce, and the experience of many this Summer, who according to my directions have dissolved the Salt in the Bathwater to improve it, and have sensibly found an increase in the other taste, but little or nothing at all in acidity.
Neither doth the Lixivium, though made very strong, nor the Oleum per deliquium dropt 20, 30, or 40 drops into a small proportion of water, tinge with Galls either purple or black.
I may also urge as an Argument for the evaporation of Vitriol, the abundance of a yellow Ochre which ascends with the steam of the Bath, and is there chiefly to be found where the steam of the Water meets with any resistance, as I have noted elsewhere, which probably may be the Terra Vitrioli: And although 'tis not very easie to give the reason, why the Vitriol should not be as visible as the Ochre, or else make it more acid than we find it to be; yet if we conceive it to be in succo primitivo, aut Solutis principiis, and there per halitum, and so per transitum too, it may better be conceived to go off, and not imbody as the other Salts do. Yet that all the Acidity is not breathed of, will appear from this, That the Bath-water cold will coagulate Milk. And what is more, the same water distill'd from a gallon to a pint, a fourth part of that pint will make a curd, when the distill'd water in the Receiver will do nothing at all: Which may probably proceed either from something Vitrioline, or rather from the acidity of Sulphur, in regard the Salt made white, in which is nothing wanting but the Sulphur, will not coagulate, as the water doth; whereas the browner Salt before calcination, dissolved in Spring-water, will. So then, this Alkali is but one part of the fixt Salt, found in the bottom of the Vessel after evaporation ad siccitatem.
For a further confirmation that an Alkali is contained in the waters, which, considering the Quantity that may continually be made evident both to sight and taste, will scarcely be judged to need other demonstration. Yet 'tis observable, that the Cross-Bath having lately been kept drawn four or five daies, the Saline matter not meeting with water sufficient for its dissolution, was driven up in substance from the Springs, and again reverberated by the ambient air, and incrustated on the tops of the stones that were above the water in the bottom of the Bath, which gave me some divertisement to behold, and, on examination, appeared much alkalizate both by taste and ignition; some pungency also I observ'd in it, which I rather judg'd to proceed from the acrimony of Nitre than Tartar, but the predominant taste was clearly alkalisate, which after the Nitrous parts were wasted, was less exceptionable in the remaining calx on the Iron after burning, in which the Alkalisate taste was most remarkable; not to mention its crepitation, and that some pungency also is observed in an Alkali it self.
To make it further evident that this accretion did probably arise from the Minera, I believe, not far distant, and was not engendred or contracted from some floating particles in the air derived elsewhere, and there settling by way of Magnetism, as some may imagine; 'tis further remarkable, That neither the stones under water, nor, what is more material, any stone either of the Seats, or in the sides of the bottom of the Bath, remote from the water, had any Salt affixed to them, but only those, as I may so term it, that peeped out of the water, the tops of which only, as I said before, were incrustated. So that had a Magnetism any place here, the Salino-Nitrous particles must, I conceive, have lighted as well on the stones of the same nature hard by, as where they were, the reason of the thing being much the same. For a fuller Testimony of this, See Obs. 88.
I acknowledge also this, That a great Fermentation is produc'd by the affusion of Acids on the Sand and Mud of the Bath, (but do not tell you who first observ'd it) and a much less on the Scum; yet I must be excus'd in this, if I say, That I cannot conceive how this should arise from the action of Acids on a Saline matter, in regard it transcends my understanding to apprehend, how any Salt can possibly lie at the bottom of the Bath, either in the Sand or Mud, undissolved, and the waters no higher impregnated than we find they are.
'Tis a trivial Observation, that what is dissolvable in any liquor, the pores of it will receive till it can hold no more; neither can I be yet perswaded, that there are just so many porosities in the Bathwater assigned for Vitriol, and the rest taken up with other Bodies, seeing the dissolution of Vitriol in the Bath-water afterwards, and the alteration in taste that happens thereupon, is sufficient to give me satisfaction to the contrary.
But to speak a little more to this, because the Author insists so much upon it; If any Vitriol be contained in the Sand, 'tis no absurdity to conceive that warm water may dissolve it and fetch it out; now, if half a pint of warm water be poured on an ounce of Sand, with what agitation you shall think convenient, and thus let stand infused ten or twelve hours, the water then decanted, and the sand dried and weighed again, there will be little wanting in the weight, abating for the Ochre, which ariseth first to the top, through the body of the water, much like white Vitriol, afterwards precipitates and settles at the bottom on the Sand, and is hardly preserved in the decantation.
The Ebullition therefore, on the affusion of acid liquors in the Sand, I conceive doth arise from somewhat not Saline (if Taste be the judge) of which I shall treat more at large by and by: So that the Sand and Salt are no further of the same nature, than as fermentation may arise upon different Commixtures. How this may be reconcil'd to the Experiment I sometime made, of making Ink with Bath-water and Galls, and the Sand of the Bath, with other things which might have been no small encouragement to this opinion, I shall have occasion in part to declare hereafter, but more when I find my Answer is required.
As to the Salt, or rather, to use the new-made word, Calcineous kind of Earth, sticking to the bottom of the Gouts and passages, almost in all places where the water passeth, I was never yet so happy, though I have searched particularly to find any such thing. I confess I have heard it spoken, that five years ago, or thereabouts, there was a Gout out of order at the Cross-Bath, in the rectifying of which there was observed some such matter adhering to the Passage; but this, I suppose, was as much above the Civilian's knowledge, as the Physicians, and whether a bare Tradition with some other uncertainties, to say no worse, be a sufficient foundation for this Hypothesis; That the Salt of the Bath doth much resemble a Vitriolated Tartar, or Aluminous Salt, I shall leave those to determine that know the meaning of this approved Sentence, Nullum simile est idem. And seeing that the Author chooses to call this adherent matter by the name of a Chalky kind of substance rather than a Salt, I think I may not be much mistaken if I imagine it to be Freestone; concerning which I can say no more, till I shall happily meet with the like accretion.
That the Fermentation on the affusion of Acids on the Sand, ariseth chiefly from the acting of that liquor on Freestone in conjunction with some Testaceous particles, and not from any other Saline matter, seems evident from this; That whereas these parts with a blew Clay or Marle, Rubrica, Ochre, and Chrystal-pebbles, are clearly distinguishable by a Magnifying-glass in the Sand, when the acid liquor hath done its worst, and the difference between the Sand and it, is amicably compos'd, the remaining particles of Sand that will not ferment, are only some part of the Marle and Chrystals; And this I call Arena castrata, because, by this means, the Sand loses its fermenting vigour, though the stones do remain.
And whereas the Mud of the Bath, which seems chiefly to consist of this blew Clay or Marle, with something Sulphurous, will do the like; the Fermentation I conceive doth arise not so much, though something I confess, from the Earth it self, as the Testaceous particles with which it abounds, in which Earth nothing Saline can be discovered to which the ebullition may make any pretence.
To this may be added; That the colour of the Acid liquor, after Saturation by the Sand, is altogether the same with what ariseth from the Freestone, both equally resembling the infusion of the filings of Steel; so that in this also there is an agreement.
CHAP. IV. Of Nitre in the Bath-Water.
THat Nitre is contained in the Body of the Waters is evident from this, that it may, by art, be extracted thence; and I may as well suspect, and, if I please, believe, that I had not mony in my pocket, when I took out some silver for a necessary use; as when I see Nitre taken out of the Bath, say it was never there.
But the difficulty will be to prove the thing; now, I say, a Sceptick may doubt whether a Man be a Man, a Brute a Brute, or whether he makes use of his voice that asks the Question; but whether he be not the wiser man that takes these for granted, and not pragmatically contradicts the unanimous consent of Judicious Writers, is easie to determine.
I confess it burns not as Common Salt-Peter doth, because it leaves a Calx behind it; but in that more resembles the Nitre of the Ancients, a pound of which being burnt will leave four ounces of Ashes: Salt-Peter will leave none. (Jord. Nat. Bath. & Min. Wat. chap.7. p. 53.)
Neither doth it huff, nor melt altogether in a small quantity as Salt-Peter doth, on the account of an allay it receives from the mixture of another Salt of an Alkalisate taste with some bitterness withal, which remains on the Iron-plate after accension, and is little more than a fourth part of the Body; wherefore to deny the being of Nitre in the Salt, because 'tis not all so, is as absurd, to make a Linsey-woolsey Comparison, as to affirm, there is no Woollen in that sort of Vesture where Linnen is; or to say, That a man that is both Lawyer and Physician, hath nothing of Physick, because he hath something of Law.
But that Nitre is there, though not predominant, seems clear by the shooting in stiria's, which is concluded to be the proper form of that Salt; and although Tartar, and perhaps some other Salts, may somewhat resemble it; yet the difference is easily perceptible by the sight, but more by the taste.
And now I am discoursing of this matter, I conceive the Author did not hit the mark, because he did not make the Bath-water shoot, in that he only mentions, the Salts that remain after evaporation, which, he says, put on a Coal, burn not as Nitre doth. But the shootings so called, in a figure somewhat pyramidal, with many Columellae, or small pillars closely united, put on a red-hot Ironplate, and so burnt, may alter the case, which I affirm to do, as I mention'd before.
And, what is not a little considerable, on the burning of six ounces of the Chrystals, in order to the Examination of the remaining Calx, the Nitrous parts of the shoots, being many in number, in a short time melted, and ran down both sides of the Iron-plate in a stream, consonant to Pliny's observation of Nitre, which he affirms ingentibus rivulis profluxisse. (Q)
To which I may add the bitter Taste apparently discoverable in the Salt, insomuch as to bring it within the verge of a suspicious appearance of a Sal amarum (if any such Salt there be distinct from Nitre) which bitterness hath been accounted proper to Nitre, and the waters impregnated therewith, of which the Laborious Ballius gives this Testimony; (De Therm. l. 5. c. 5.) Differunt etiam Nitrosae Aquae à Salsis, quòd amarorem Nitrosae sapiunt potius quam Salsuginem, & quo magis syncerum habent Nitrum eo sunt amariores. So that the bitter Calx mentioned before, seems, if any, to be the true Calx of Nitre, and no small argument of its sincerity, although this taste be not perceptible in the water, in regard the Nitre is much diluted, and though sufficient for the purpose, not in so great a proportion there.
Also for a further satisfaction, if any Aluminous parts were contained in the Chrystal shoots, I observ'd, That the six ounces mentioned before, after they had hufft, melted and ran upon the Iron-plate, were in little more than one minute reduced to somewhat less than two ounces of a dead white Calx; which being again dissolved, filtred and evaporated, gave me a plain Alkali with some remaining bitterness, which on the affusion of any acid would ferment, and being put to undergo the fire-ordeal Trial, would neither melt nor boyl, but crackle and leap.
To make a further Trial, whether what was bitter and suspiciously Nitrous might be separated from the Alkali; I dissolved and filtred the same Salt again, and evaporating it ad Cuticulam, it shot partly into a white hoary down, penetrating cooling, and bitter, distinct from the Alkali with which before it was mixt, and partly into an inspissated juyce, which I judge to be the succus primitivus of Nitre, with the same qualities; both which put on the Plate did huff and melt as the former, leaving a small bitter Calx behind it, which, I believe, by frequent dissolutions, evaporations, and coagulations, would huff and melt all off, to the utter consumption of its whole body that way, I mean as far as Nitrous, the Alkali shewing it self proportionable in the Calx, after every trial.
And here I would not be mistaken, as if I pretended to that grand Arcanum, the discovery of the Nitre of the Ancients, for I am well assured, that the description of that is very much different from what I am now discoursing of, being acknowledged by Pliny, Dioscorides, and others, to be of a rosie colour, and almost purple, which they used sometimes to dye that colour with (though some white there was also) and came nearer to the nature of ordinary Salt, whereupon Dioscorides in his 85th. Chapter hath these words, Nitre, and the froth of Nitre (or Aphronitrum) have the same virtues as Salt, and are burn't like that; yet because some measures may be taken from that, for the better understanding of what is now under the test, I thought fit in that regard at present, only to make this bare mention of it.
Neither can the contrary, I think, be evinced from the effects; for cooling, penetrating, and purging, are attributed to Nitre, and confessedly in the waters, the two former evident in allaying thirst, abating inflammations, and quickness of passage: the latter, as plain in its operation, for Nitre as well as Salt, is said both alvum laxare, and urinas ciere, and Baccius treating of nitrous waters, affirms, that they do vacuare, virtute Nitri, per alvum, & per urinas. The like may be said of the external effects by Bathing, which can no way prejudice the being of Nitre there.
Besides, This way of arguing from the effects is but à posteriori, and less significant where there is matter of fact, which may be useful in the dark; but if it thwart with a plain experiment, must yield; for, Quid verba audiam, cum videam facta? And whoever shall undertake a business of this nature may consider, that the best judgment to be made of the effects, is from a constant observation of particulars on the place, which cannot be conceived to be so well done at a distance, but must require, besides some time, a good attendance, as well as practice here. But to return.
These Stiriae, or Needles, I observed in the water of all the Baths, yet in a different shape and consistence; for the King's Bath-water after a full imbibition of the Salt dissolved, and a strong Lixivium thence procured, evaporated ad Cuticulam, and set in a cool place, shot from the inside of the evaporating Glass into its Cavity, into strong, and compacted Needles, with that strength, that it took some of the Common Salt with it, which appeared in the Nitrous shoots, something like the stars in a clear sky, but white, and in a Cubical form, in perfect squares, or Tessera's distinct from the body of the Nitrous shoots, with which the Nitre was studded, being impacted into it.
The Cross Bath shot in smaller Needles, but longer and very thin, in great number, directly from the bottom of the glass, very close together, but distinct each from other, much like the Finnow, or hairy excrescence, that oftentimes ariseth from corrupted matter, which on the least violence offer'd would break, and not endure any kind of resistance.
Drawings of stiriae or needles
The Hot Bath gave me more trouble to bring it to shoot, insomuch as being frustrated in two or three Experiments, I had almost concluded there was nothing Nitrous there, but the thing afterwards succeeding, I had on a small quantity of the Salt dissolved, and the Lixivium evaporated according to Art, five, or six single Stiria's, bigger, and stronger, though not so long, as those I observed in the water of the Cross Bath, which gave me satisfaction as to that Bath also, in the particular thing of Nitre now under debate. Since which time on another Experiment, I had as firm and compacted Needles from the Hot Bath, as I had formerly from the King's, both which Baths shoot much alike, and different from the Cross.
I shall not lay any great stress on these observations, in relation to the difference between the three Baths mentioned before, in regard it must be a business of greater experience, and more exact observation of many Circumstances, to state that affair as it ought to be, and is, in good part done in the Miscellaneous Observations hereunto annex'd; only this use I may safely make of them, to confirm what I had before asserted, That there is Nitre dissolved in the Water of all the Baths of Bathe. And if this be not the thing that hath hitherto been described under that name, by the most approved Writers, I presume we may afterwards take it for a Chimerical notion, that hath no foundation in any work of Nature, but owes its subsistence to a phantastical brain.
To this may be further added; That the Liquamen, or oleum per deliquium, being closely stopt, and but heated by the fire, presently, as soon as cold, concretes into a Nitrous form; so that we need not call in the secret, and invisible assistance of the external air, to make a Metamorphosis almost as strange as those mentioned by the Poet, when we have clear, and unalterable principles of Nature, and innate propensities, and disposition in matter it self, with a divine impression, that will serve the turn.
In the rear of these Philosophical Arguments, I shall offer one (supernumerary) Grammatical, which is this; That the Salt I call Nitrous, either in the Sun, or by Candle-light, shines and sparkles very much, consonant to the Notation of the word Nitrum, which probably, may not be so much a Grecian, as the great Etymologist would have it, and derived para to nizein from its scouring, and absterging nature; as a Latinist, and so called à Nitendo; because it gives a greater lustre than any other Salt doth.
------
CHAP. V. Of Sulphur in the Bath water.
AS to Sulphur, the next thing to be insisted on, as contained in the Waters, I conceive that many that have endeavoured to avoid Charybdis, have fallen into Scylla, and because the ancient Authors have asserted that Sulphur was undoubtedly concern'd in all Baths, they will affirm there is none in any; but whoever builds a fabrick on this foundation, and certainly concludes, that Sulphur is not in the Bath-waters, because it cannot be discover'd by precipitation, I would have forbear a positive determination on a negative experiment, till I see Vitriol precipitated in substance from the King's Bath-water, which is acknowledg'd to be there. And if I cannot light on an apt precipitater, which every way opposeth the particles to be so discover'd, and have some other reasons to incline me to the contrary, I should not be so fond of my own conceit, as to be prevail'd upon by a comparative instance of unflak't Lime, to wipe my own Nose, and put out my Eyes, which as far as they can, assure me to the contrary.
I shall refer the Reader to what is mention'd before concerning the Colour and Smell, in calcining the Contents of the Bath-water in general, and till I shall meet with something that will both burn blew, and give a fetid smell, that is not Sulphur, I shall so esteem that, till ascertain'd of the contrary.
I may further add, That the Sulphur is probably incorporated with the Salt, as appears by its passing with it into the Lixivium, and through papers in filtration, and not discoverable but by a strong fire, by which the body of the Salt is open'd, and a solution of the Continuum made, in order to fusion; so that if you do not precipitate both, you can precipitate neither, unless a separation of the Sulphur from the Salt be made, which, I presume, is not easie to be done, without the help of fire, by which the Sulphur is consum'd: so that the comparative instance of unflak't Lime is little to the purpose; where the Sulphur is separated, decocted, and precipitated; here not so, being not apart, but residing in a Salino-Sulphureous Salt, a piece of whose Body, as we now have it, it seems to be.
Moreover, Whereas he collects from the Bathwaters not tinging Silver yellow, but rather black, that there is no Sulphur contained in the same; I may retort, and that very justly, this as an argument to assert it. For the proper colour that Sulphur dissolved gives to Silver is not so much yellow as black, as may be easily discerned by putting any piece of Silver, but a very little while, into the decoction of Sulphur made in the water of unflak't Lime, which gives as near the colour of the Silver I have caused to lye some time near the Springs of the Bath, as may be, so that the difference is not discernable; not to mention that some yellowness is observed on the Silver tinged by the Bath.
Neither am I fully satisfied that the only, or indeed the best, precipitator of Sulphur is an acid; for on the decoction of that Mineral in the water of quick Lime (the Lixivium, though with much Sulphur, not succeeding) and very sudden change, on the affusion of Spirit of Vitriol, into a milky, and much whiter Consistence, the Liquor afterwards settled, and precipitated not as Sulphur, but Lime-stone; so that the Sulphur, although it gave a greater fetid smell, yet was not so apparently precipitated, as by Oyl of Tartar in another glass, which gave the Sulphur in proper colour precipitated, without a permanent lacteous opacity. Whereupon I made this observation, as to the present experiment, That although acids do not precipitate of this lapideous matter alone, yet if in the embraces a strong sulphurous commixture, they will, and the Lime-stone is most properly precipitated by an acid, if Sulphur be decocted with it; whereas the Body of Sulphur, decocted as before, is best precipitated by a fixt Salt, the Sulphur appearing without whiteness, in its own garb, though not so fetid as on the affusion of an acid.
It may be also noted that S. Closseus, in his preparation of Lac Sulphuris, in which the body of Sulphur is open'd with Calx Vive, directs the Sulphur to be precipitated with Urine.
The occasion of this mistake (seeing he pretends to give the reason of another, concerning an experiment of a like nature) I conceive to be, That the white matter precipitated on the affusion of any acid, was, without much examination, reputed wholly sulphurous, as appears from these words; For if Sulphur be boyled in the water of unflak't Lime, the water becomes white, not by the affusion of a fixt Salt, as before, but of an acid: so that fixt Salts may dissolve Sulphur but not precipitate it. Whereas the whiteness ariseth much from the mixture of the Lime-stone, as appears by the open confession of what is precipitated, if standing some time, filter'd, and brought to the test by fire, where the Lime-stone is discover'd, the Sulphur being rather disturb'd than precipitated by the acid liquor, which makes it give a greater fetor, but never kindly precipitates; the other precipitation with oyl of Tartar, which here, contrary to its wonted course, joyns with the Lime-stone, which it usually precipitates, and opposeth the Sulphur, is very apparent, and sulphurous beyond contradiction.
I am not ignorant, that in the preparation of Lac Sulphuris mentioned before, Sulphur also is precipitated by an acid, but that fixt Salts should dissolve Sulphur, but not precipitate it, is what I said I was not so fully satisfied in. Not to mention that the matter precipitated by a fixt Salt is white on the first affusion, though the whiteness be not so permanent, the Sulphur in a short time precipitating in proper colour.
Besides, If Sulphur be boyled in the Bath-water, and doth not tinge it with a yellow colour, I presume, it cannot thence be argu'd that there is no Brimstone there, for the colour of the water in which Sulphur is dissolved, is not so much yellow as Lixiviate, or reddish; and therefore Schroder gives this direction for the making that preparation of Sulphur mentioned before, that after the Sulphur and Tartar are mixed, they ought to boyl, donec fere omne Sulphur solutum sit, liquorq; rubeus appareat; though some addition I confess it may have from the Tartar. Yet Closseus, in his way of making that preparation where there is no Salt of Tartar, but, instead of that quick-Lime, which gives no such tincture of it self, hath this Note; Coque, donec partes tres aquae sint consumptae, ruboremque contraxerit instar sanguinis, ex Sulphure dissoluto.
I therefore think it no ill advice here, that they that are so much concern'd to give the reason of the mistakes of others, would a little mind to rectifie their own, and not be an Argus abroad, but a Mole at home.
I do also acknowledg, that I believe that the white Magistery or impalpable Powder, precipitated from the Bath-water on the affusion of Salt of Tartar, or any other analogous, or agreeable Salt, is not Sulphurous, much less Aluminous; but rather Stony, of a lapideous substance, the result of an intimate Commixture, with the body of the Waters, which may have no small influence on their fermentation, as may hereafter be more fully consider'd.
And as to what reflects on that famous Practitioner, the Ingenious and Learned Dr. Willis, I shall, at present, say no more than this, That observing one so pedantickly drest up in his own clothes, he ought not to be affrighted with his own shape; only this may be further noted, That whereas Dr. Willis had desired of me the exacter trial of that Experiment of decocting Sulphur and Antimony in the Bath-water, I well remember I return'd him something of both that was precipitated after a double filtration, and the decoction performed in a Vessel altogether free from the season of any fixt Salt.
Yet I must acknowledg, that what was precipitated was very inconsiderable to what was decocted, and not so much as to make much alteration in the colour of the water; which may deserve their consideration who affirm, a Lime-Chalk Stone, or Lapis calcarius, to be contained in the Waters, and yet deny them to dissolve Sulphur, and again affirm, that Sulphur is dissolved in the water of Lime.
The same alteration of the water into a turbid milky appearance, and the precipitation by oyl of Tartar, of an insipid powder, mentioned before, was also observed in the Spaw at Scarborough, and Sulphur-Well at Knaresbrough, by William Simpson Doctor in Physick, as appears from several places in his Hydrologia Chymica, and Hydrological Essays, which he there asserts to be Aluminous, and page 118. of the latter Treatise saith; By the addition of Oyl of Tartar this Sulphur-water turns white, and that because it is impregnated with a small quantity of a Simple natural Alom Salt. How far Alom is concerned in that water, I shall not here dispute, but leave it to the Learned Dr. Wittie, whose concern it is: only thus much I can say, that the like Phaenomenon appearing in these waters, what is thus precipitated here is not Aluminous, as hath been acknowledged by many eminent Physitians, who have seen some quantity of the precipitated powder; and was particularly noted by the ever Honoured Sir Charles Scarbrough, this Summer, here.
But to prevent any mis-understanding, I must acknowledg that this assertion stands on this foundation, That the white powder precipitated by oyl of Tartar from the Waters, is the same with the finer sort of what I had, in greater quantities precipitated spontaneously per decubitum, on the evaporation of many Hogsheads of the Water, and is now to be seen, though not altogether so white nor fine, having undergone many alterations, which being decocted in Spring-water, the water filter'd will precipitate with oyl of Tartar, as the Bath-water doth; yet if any one shall think fit to deem this Saline, and perhaps, Aluminous; he ought to consider, how any Salt can so soon by devested of the essential property of what is saline, as to be rendred perfectly insipid, when saline at first: though I do not absolutely deny, but that we may attribute, though somewhat Catachrestically, the name of Salt, to something not saline, communicating with it in some other of its properties.
I know very well that Alom dissolved in Springwater, the Water filter'd and the Salt precipitated with oyl of Tartar, will be impaired much in its saline taste; yet so much of the sowrness, and stipticity will remain, as will be sufficient to discover its nature.
CHAP. VI. Of Vitriol in the Bath-water.
TO pass by the Reason of the Common Artifice of tinging Silver at the Bath, what concerns the Scum, and Sal Armoniack, as of no great moment; Vitriol is, by Him, denied to be in the Cross and Hot Bath, because Galls beaten and infused in these Waters, will never turn them purple nor black, which is confessed would certainly be, if these Waters had Vitriol in them.
How true this is, a slight Experiment will soon evince, and if the Author had ever made trial, his Galls or Sight, must be worse than mine, if a purple colour did not appear.
To which may be added the Experience and Testimony of my Honoured and Learned Friends Sir Edward Greaves, and Dr. Nat. Highmore, who have both made trial, and found the Waters turn. With the former of whom I lately further observ'd, that when we had been sufficiently satisfied in the turning colour of the Hot Bath Pump-water, with less than half a pint of Water and but two grains of Galls, and had thrown away the Water and Galls, in order to the trial of something else, more of the same Water, though much cooler than when brought at first, being powred into the same glass, turn'd colour also, receiving a brisk light purple, from the remaining particles of the former infusion about the glass, though nothing of the Galls did appear at all.
'Tis also confirm'd by this, That whereas the Leaves of Oak made little or no alteration in the Water of the King's Bath, the Chips, or inner Bark of the same make rather a better purple in the Water of all the Baths, than the Galls; only the King's Bath tingeth deeper than the other two, as in all Experiments of this nature, it appears to do. The like also will happen on the Seeds of Sumach contus'd and infus'd, but with Pomegranate Flowers most apparently, so that the Water of any of the Baths affused hot on that, will presently turn purple; though the colour doth not keep so long in strength, as that which ariseth from the Oaken Chips.
These things consider'd, I conceive it no injury to the King's Bath to allow it a little Vitriol, though manifestly derogatory to the other two to deny it, since they make their claim by the same evidence, and that Judg will hardly free himself from the censure of injustice and partiality, that will not hear a poor mans Tale, but suffers an honest Cause that hath weak lungs and a weaker purse to be lost, on the louder clamours of more importunate addresses.
The truth of this Experiment being thus far call'd in question, I am the more afraid of the certainty of some others; for I remember an old Story of Mr. Thief in the University, that was wont to be very busie in some Booksellers Shops, and entred in the Shop-Book under that name, whoever therefore was taken in the fact but one time, was oblig'd to quit the whole score, on this account, That he that was really convicted once, might commit the same thing five, ten, or twenty times before, and therefore he the man from whom all was requir'd.
The Metallick Mineral, so called, hath nothing Metallick contained in it; and if this be so easily, by the air, converted into Vitriol, 'tis very strange we have not yet had any Houses of Vitriol, which surely have endur'd the air long enough to experience a Transmutation.
As for the Sand breaking out with the Springs in which Vitriol is supposed to lye undissolv'd, as was mentioned before, if there were no better arguments for Vitriol than this, I shall not stick to say, that he that depends on this, builds at best but on a sandy foundation.
That the purple colour appearing from the mixture of the Sand of the Bath, with the infusion of Galls, may not arise from the tincture of Vitriol, seems more than probable by this Experiment. I have formerly declared, that the Sand of the Bath may be so far corroded with an acid Menstruum, as not to ferment any longer, but lye quiet in the bottom of the glass without any motion at all; now, this Sand on the affusion of Common Water gave an excellent purple, when 'tis not likely that any thing saline should remain, after so many washings and reaffusions, as are requisite to reduce the Sand to that condition. Moreover 'tis considerable, the infusion was not acid, nor any way alter'd from its common tast. But this Experiment I made but once, and had not an opportunity of repeating it again.
'Tis likewise more observable, That after some hours standing, a purple floccous matter did spontaneously precipitate, upon which there being a clear separation, the Water return'd to its pristine colour, and the floccous matter subsided in the bottom of the glass, which being filter'd per Chartam, and examin'd, was perfectly insipid, and not at all Vitrioline.
Besides, On the Calcination of half a pound of the Sand, when the Crucible was as red and the Sand as hot as usually it is when the Salts do run, the Sand powred out glowing hot, nothing saline was observ'd to concrete among it, which it would certainly do, if any fusible Salt were there, as in other Calcinations it appears to do.
I therefore rather judg it to proceed from an insipid but astringent Ochre, such as is mentioned by Fallopius, which lying some time in the open air, becomes more sowr than when taken out of the Bath, which may occasion the difference between the Sand newly taken, and that which is kept some time; the Ochre it self infus'd making the liquor much blacker after some standing, as is more fully declared in the following Chapter. (De Met. & Foss. c. 35. de Ochra.)
------
CHAP. VII. Containing a farther Proof and Illustration of the former particulars.
TO make this a little clearer; 'Tis an easie Experiment to powr warm water on the Sand, in what proportion you please, which if kept some time will alter the water in which it is infus'd, into a yellowish or amber colour: when the water is impregnated very well, mix some of this with the infusion of Galls, and presently an atropurpureous colour will appear, in which if you infuse white paper but a very little while, you will quickly be satisfied what colour it will tinge. Now, if this infusion be permitted to cool, the Ochre will precipitate, leaving the water somewhat yellower than in it self it is, to which it also communicates a harsh tast, and at last settles on the top of the Sand, from which it may be separated by decantation. The contrary happens to the Sand newly taken, in which the Ochre clogg'd with too much moisture cannot shew it self, as when older, and more dry. So that I see no reason or necessity, from this Phaenomenon, to assert the existence of Vitriol in the Sand of the Bath, otherwise than as it hath relation to this astringent Ochre, which I do believe receives this tinging property by the impression of Vitriol, this being in all probability, as is noted elsewhere, the Terra Vitrioli, or Earth, in which the Vitriol is contain'd before exhalation; as I conceive, the Marl or Mud is the bed of Sulphur, or the Terra, to which that Mineral doth more nearly adhere.
And that 'tis this yellow matter that occasions the alteration, may be further evident from this; That after the first decanting, if the Ochre be powred all off, and warm water affused on the Sand again, and that infusion mixed with the infusion of Galls, no change of colour will ensue. To which may be added, that the Ochre it self kept some time, and infused in the decoction of Galls, will, after lying a pretty while, turn that Liquor into a much blacker appearance.
I shall end this dispute with the observation of one (D. Simpson), who affirms, That Artificial Alom will not with Galls strike a purple colour, but the Natural Alom with its inbred Ochre, will; ascribing more to the Ochre than the Alom. So that this may be the end of that Controversie about Alom and Galls tinging Water purple, That Alom, as Alom, doth not tinge, but as in conjunction with this inbred Ochre, or as Vitrioline; for between Vitriol and Alom there are many resemblances, and a worthy Author hath observed, that the Basis of Vitriol is Alom, both these being much alike, but that Vitriol hath a garb from Copper or Iron, which in the Ochre gives the tinging quality, the Alom, as distinct from Vitriol, contributing nothing at all. (Jord. Nat. Bath. chap. 7. p. 52.)
If any shall affirm this Ochre to be Vitrioline, I have not deny'd it, having formerly supposed it might be Terra Vitrioli; but what I here question is, whether any Vitrioline saline body, different from the Ochre, be contained in the Sand, or can lye undissolved there.
'Tis very remarkable what is said, That if the Sand of the Bath, impregnated with an acid Liquor, be put into the infusion of Galls, the Liquor acquires an atropurpureous colour; and no wonder, since the acid Liquor may do much alone, as may be seen in the mixture of Vinegar, with the decoction or infusion of Galls, which supplying in some measure the place of Vitriol, by a kind of analogy inclines the infusion to an inky complexion.
And as for the Metallick Mineral contained in the Sand, which on the affusion and corrosion of an acid Menstruum, will in part be converted into Vitriol, I have said before that 'tis nothing else but a Common Freestone, a Mineral, I confess, but how far Metallick, I leave to the judgment of the men of that Art.
For a partial satisfaction in this thing; if the sharpest Vinegar be powred on the Sand in one glass, and on Freestone in another, the same fermentation will appear for the present, and the same blewish colour of the infusion afterwards upon Corrosion; so that it much resembles the colour and smell of the saturated Liquor, on the affusion of Vinegar on the filings of Iron. But whether this be a sufficient argument to dub it Metallick, I shall be better satisfied, when I am convinced of this, That Truth hath never suffer'd by meer Resemblances.
But that it may appear that I desire to proceed in this Affair with all ingenuity and freedom from animosity, unless what will seem necessary to discover truth; I shall here recite a Passage out of Dr. Wittie's Answer to Hydrologia Chymica, leaving how far it may be applicable to the saline Stiria's mentioned before, to the judicious Reader and further observation.
The Candid Doctor, pag. 63. among other Preparations out of the Minerals of the Spaw at Scarbrough, made by Mr. Sam. Johnston, a Physician at Beverly, and by him communicated to the Doctor, makes mention of an Essential Salt, which Mr. Johnston calls Anomalous, or sui generis, as differing much from the factitious or natural kinds of Alom, Vitriol, or Nitre, though in some properties it agree with each of them.
The Reason of this Scruple, he adds, is this, which Paracelsus hath clearly made out, That here they are not corporally, but (I suppose, the Doctor doth not mean, that what is percolated hath no body or substance, but only that 'tis more refin'd.) percolated, not perfect in their several kinds, but in suo primitivo, not single, but all mixed together, which as yet I could never attain to separate. And therefore this Salt is nothing so acid as Vitriol, nor stiptick as Alom, nor inflammable as Nitre, notwithstanding it doth shoot in Stiria's. I'le only add this, That they are all here, though in fractis, imminutis, & debilitatis viribus, and the virtues of the Waters to be judged from them all.
To which I shall only subjoyn this Remarque, That the Nitre, undoubtedly here, being allay'd with the mixture of some other Salts, could not be expected to do altogether as sincere Nitre doth, and the best way, I conceive, to discover the distinct natures in this Compositum, had been to have attempted a separation by frequent Calcinations, Dissolutions, and Coagulations, which, if done, I much admire the several Salts did not appear in proper form, as they did in the anomalous Salt of these Waters, subjected to the same way of trial: and then I somewhat question, whether Alom would have deserved so much favour, as the Doctor's good nature hath allow'd it here.
I shall forbear, at present, to trace this Author or follow his track any further, as also to examine his Opinion, concerning the Cause of the Heat of the Bath-waters, till my Treatise, in the same language he hath written in, be presented to the World; only thus much I shall say now, That I conceive an Hypothesis founded, though not on a subterranean fire, yet on things under ground, may probably give more satisfaction than some airy notions, considering especially, that nothing external to the Body of the Earth, can in reason be supposed capable of reaching these Waters, but rather somewhat included in its own Bowels, which may be near at hand, of an active, even, and durable nature; when, to say no more, nothing is more variable than the air, nor unconstant than rain.
I shall also distinguish the whole bulk of what relates to the Body of the Waters, into things Saline, and non-Saline: the former I shall endeavour to evince to be Nitre, Common Salt, and Vitriol; the latter, to be partly unctuous, as Bitumen and Sulphur; partly gritty, as Freestone; and partly earthy, as Marl and Ochre. I shall likewise examine what pretences Alom can make, and further discourse of the difference between that and Vitriol: and lastly, enquire into the competition of Lapis Calcarius with Freestone; so that the Bathwater will have relation to, or comprehend in its largest extent, eight distinct Substances, at least according to my Observations, which will be the business, God willing, of the first Book of my Treatise De Thermis Bathoniensibus, viz. de Aquarum Principiis, una cum earundem appendiculis, nimirum, Arena, sive Sabulo, Luto, & supernatante uligine, sive Spumâ. The second Book shall treat De Aquarum Calore. The third De usu Thermarum; ubi de modo Balneandi; de Aquarum potatione; de Antliatione jam in usu loco dulciae, aut Stillicidii Veterum; de usu Luti, &c. The fourth and last Book, I intend, shall be De Aquarum Virtutibus, & Nocumentis, observationibus quibusdam rarioribus, quantum res ipsa patitur confirmatis: Which Emoluments and Inconveniences shall be both evidently deduced from the precedent Principles, the one recommended, the other provided against. But this will require some time; for I am willing to prevent that fault in my self, which I find in another, and would not have it justly said of me, Canis festinans coecos parit Catulos.
------





