THE Present State OF PHYSICK & SURGERY IN LONDON. With an Estimate of the Prizes of all the MEDICINES Now in Use.
IN A LETTER From a Merchant in London, to a Dispensary Physician, with the Physicians Answer.
------
Siste gradum, & specta: Non hic Ludicra peruntur Praemia, sed vestrâ de Vitâ & Sanguine certant.Cos acuens ferrum, quando AEgro Vena secunda, Sic ait: ut prosim, quàm mihi dulce teri?
------
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, over against Jonathan's Coffe-House in Exchange-Ally in Cornhill, 1701.
The Subscribers to the Dispensary.
SIR Tho. Millington President.
Dr. Collins.
Dr. Charleton.
Dr. Torlesse.
Dr. Morris.
Dr. Hulse.
Dr. Fowke.
Dr. Goodall.
Dr. Cox.
Dr. Gibson.
Dr. Harris.
Dr. Briggs.
Dr. Mills.
Dr. Bateman.
Dr. Dawes.
Dr. Gill.
Dr. Rich. Robinson.
Dr. Pitt.
Sir Edm. King.
Sir Theod. Colladon.
Dr. Harrel.
Dr. Gray.
Dr. Le Fevre.
Dr. Hutton.
Dr. Sloan.
Dr. Hawys.
Dr. Garth.
Dr. Gaylard.
Dr. Nicholas.
Dr. Wright.
Dr. Harvey.
Dr. Drake.
Dr. Woolaston.
Dr. Woodward.
Dr. Colebrook.
Dr.Rich. Morton.
Dr.Norris.
Dr.Branthwait.
Dr.Ch. Morton.
Dr.Morelli.
Dr.Cockburn.
Dr.Hamilton.
Dr.Horseman.
Dr.Colebatch.
Dr.Silvester.
------
------
The PREFACE to the Reader.
DEsigning to Publish these Papers, on a Subject in which every one is now, or will hereafter be Concern'd, I addresst to the Evening Meeting at the College, after they had given their Advice to a large Confluence of Patients, for a more particular Information, having lately met with some Reflections on the Dispensary. They gave me the Reasons, which mov'd them to make the first Subscription to their Repository of Medicines.
1. That the Apothecaries had often Reproach the Physicians, that the Poor were left to their Care, and that they neglected the Pharmaceutic Part, or the Preparations of Remedies, which was now lodg'd in themselves.
I was convinc'd that the Dispensary is the greatest Relief to the Poor, who have the best advice, and the best Physick at a very small Expence.
The Physicians are frequently considering the Drugs, and as carefully viewing the common Preparations, improving them, and adding others, which they judge more useful to the various intentions of their Art.
2. The Citizens very often Complain to their Physicians of the very chargeable Bills of the Apothecaries, and declare their Jealousie of a Combination in the multiplying Medicines, and Doses, beyond the Exigence of the Disease.
The Dispensary gives releif to the First, by affording theirs almost at the First Cost, 15 or 18 in 20 Cheaper than they are paid for in the Bill, at Christmas. And the Dispensary Physicians being under no Engagements with the Apothecaries, Cure their Patients with One, or a few Prescriptions, in less difficult Disorders: with no more, than are necessary in the more dangerous Distempers, carefully avoiding (all Medicines acting on Nature with more or less violence) the more hazardous Extreme. The Charge is under 10 or 20 Shillings in a Feaver or Small Pox, instead of so many Pounds. Many others require not Physick of more than Three or Four Shillings, which by the Craft of subdividing into Boles, and Powders, and Draughts are in the Sum total of a Bill Four or Five Pounds, the Rates to be supported by the very hard Names, with which they are Dignify'd for this purpose.
3. The Third Reason respects the Physicians. They have been many Years under the dread of the Apothecaries power, who avowedly own, they Command in all the Families, and can bring in, or turn out, whom they please. They observe, they Govern as a Tyrant his Subjects, make them obedient by the grievous Taxes they are forc't to Pay. The People from the exorbitant Payments to them, dare not consult a Physician, unless at the last extremity of a Disease.
The Physicians would govern their Patients, only by their own Reason. They have the Liberty of having very cheap Physick, instead of very dear, and consulting them at the beginning of a Distemper, secure from an Expence which shall at any time surprize.
They would prevent their own Ruine, chiefly from their best Success. This has been hitherto the Case of the Faculty. If they Conquered a Distemper, the Remedy (tho' not the manner of using it) becomes the Apothecaries Nostrum, to be Sold out to every one, and their Successors: And the Doctor left at leisure to invent more, to remain with him during the Cure of one Patient, like the Ephemera, which lives but one Day.
Thus the Dispensary complies with the Two Proposals of the Apothecaries, removes the Peoples Complaints and Jealousy of a Cheat put on them by all Physicians, and gives the license to him of using his own Method and Prescript, to his Patients advantage and his own.
The Apothecary cannot with any ingenuity complain, that he is injured. For as he seizes on the Advising part, as a Dependency, he would annex to the Shop Trade: The other from the Example brings them both together to the better Service of the Publick. If the Apothecary proves an Ambodexter, feels the Pulse with one Hand, and makes Medicines with the other; Why may not the College please the People with the same Dexterity? Unless (which is reasonable, where Health and Life are taken care of) the Apothecary will wholly Practice the Judicial part, and leave the Ministerial of making Medicines to the Physician.
But I have heard the Dispensary impeacht with the barbarous Design of destroying the Apothecaries Company. They Scorn the ridiculous Imputation, and declare the greatest Esteem of those of that Society, who, like the Gentleman near the College, Moribus antiquis, are as Eminent for their Care in preparing the best Medicines, as their Integrity and Modesty in not invading the Profession, or abusing and destroying the People. The Apothecaries destroy themselves by their Numbers, multiplying from a Thousand to as many more in the space of Eight Years, without any Prospect of checking the superfluous Increase.
They must therefore accuse the unhappy Conduct of their Company, who would not foresee, and are now insensible of its fatal Consequences.
They avow with assurance, that they have or will take the Practice of Physick into their own Hands, only reserve Five or Six Great Men, to take on themselves the Odium of the Deaths of their Customers. The Surgeons fare not better than the Faculty, They are reserv'd for the Difficult Cases, are rob'd of all the more common; by success in which, they can only acquire Skill and Dexterity for the more Important. The Poor are undone in every Sickness, and destroyed in the subsequent, deter'd from applying to any Relief. The Dispensary pretends to preserve those, who are at present more numerous than the Apothecaries.
It will be the Alma Mater to the Physicians from the Two Universities: who will be able to Exercise the Learning they had acquir'd there.
The other Objection I have often heard from the more unobserving People, or whose Memory may not serve them well, that the Apothecaries sell us Cheap. It's granted, if they will. But do not they by their own and the Doctor's Artifices in dividing, sell an Electuary of 12 Pence (the most Cordial and most us'd in Feavers) in Boles for 12 Half Crowns: A Julep of the same Value, put into little Glasses, for almost as much. A bitter or other Decoction, which may be Boyl'd at Home in Silver, or cleaner Vessels, then in the Shop, of Two or Three Pence, brought in little Doses, at 10 or 12 Shillings. We will not quarrel their 11 Pence in the Shilling Profit, would only prevent the return of it 40 times in 24 Hours many days following, when the Patients advantage is the least part of the Design of the mincing and subdividing.
The Last and Vilest Objection is, that the subscribers to the Dispensary are not as Eminent, as the Physicians their Favourites. It's own'd they can make Famous or Infamous, by a few Cabals and Visits in all Quarters of the Town. But is there any part of Physick, even Poetry, which these Gentlemen cannot pretend to, as well as the other, who distrust their own Merit, by courting their Favour, and putting themselves into their Service; and plying them, as Porters a Shop of the larger Business.
I could not, till after a long Discourse, penetrate into the more abstruse and secret design of the Dispensary. 'Twas own'd at last by those the most proper Judges, that the People in the more common and usual Illnesses, recover easily by the Strength of Nature, or one or two proper Directions. In these a great, but useless Expence must pay the Attendance of the Apothecary, who has no gratuity given him but must satisfy himself by the number of things, he can prevail on the Sick to taeke.
In the other Diseases with Danger, when Nature is weak or raging and has only one Crisis (of its own choosing chiefly) by which it can be sav'd; and many hot or cooling Doses, unhappily given, or diverting the Crisis by one tampering, brings certain Destruction. By this unfortunate, but in vogue management, 'twas asserted, that the far greater Numbers are Kill'd and Destroy'd by Physick, who would undisturb'd have surely recover'd without Any.
The Dispensary Practice will in a little time demonstrate, that the Remedy to this Pernicious Practice can be only had from it self, secure from the Infection of this Inhumane Craft of growing Rich. Others therefore, who resolve to continue in the Old Mode and Fashion, and will have the Apothecary to please himself in the Price and Number of the Medicines they take, need not express any Resentment to the Dispensary, which only proposes a Method in all respects more Commodious for them.
They may expect that this will be Debated between the Physicians of the Apothecaries Party and the Peoples, the one Side relying on the receiv'd Maxim, si Populus decipi vult, decipiatur, the other, on the Magna Charta of all Communities, Salus Populi Suprema Lex esto.
When it shall become Sensible, how much the Publick is impos'd on in the Expence in Sickness and in Life it self. The Laws which now Punish Offenders, who by Support or Discipline might have been diverted, will at last interpose the Cure of more Latent, and more enormous Crimes. The Faculty will have the Protection it Demands, after the performance of its Part, of all the stipulated Conditions. The Dispensary will have the publick regard, or observe its Enemies some times Punished with Fines, more than the Hundred Marks, or the other more Severe, the loss of Life, from Medicines in the exorbitant Quantity, as destructive as Poyson.
------

------
------
A Letter from a Merchant in London, to a Dispensary Physician.
SIR,
I reflected often after my discovery from my Feaver on the method reviv'd by the Dispensary Physicians, of treating their Patients with a few Medicines (not almost hourly every day, as is the present mode of the Town) but as you observe the effect of the last, and the apparent exigence of the Disease. This Caution gave me a greater confidence in your Art, and was improv'd by the assurance I had of the Medicines being faithfully prepar'd and dispenc't at the College: the expence of which was less during my confinement, than I have had formerly exacted in one day. How often have I thought of the strict command you gave, that I should after my restless nights, remain undisturb'd till almost Noon, and of the repose and refreshment I never fail'd of during the morning. You demanded the first view of me, before I was rufled by any intrusion, especially by those who from a groundless pretence to skill disturb by vain enquiries, or terrifie by random Prognosticks, the entertainment for the mind during the inquietude of the night following.
When you allow'd me to sit up and receive my Friends, I had one day the conversation of my Relations, who had consulted you, They entertain'd me with this new Revolution in Physick, and the generous design of the Dispensary, with which they declar'd themselves extremely satisfy'd. They told me that this Contest between the Honest Physicians of the Dispensary (thus it seems you are distinguisht, tho the word has lately lost its value) and the Apothecaries on the other side, supported by their Confederates the Anti-College Physicians, was as much the common Discourse abroad, as the difference of the two Companies, the Bank and their Antagonists, or the great Factions, which divide the Nation. 'Twas not very easie to us, to find out, upon what reasons and pretences this Controversy began, and is now carried on with so much heat and animosity.
But we, who had been advis'd by you, and has us'd the College Remedies, could more easily discover the true causes of this Separation, than the Citizens, who yet ly under great Errours and Prejudices in this Affair.
The case I presume (and it was the Opinion of the whole Company) may be stated in these few particulars.
That the Honest Physician is oblig'd by the Trust repos'd in him by his Patient, and his Interest in the Success, to take Care, that the Medicines are effectual and Dispenc't with the utmost Fidelity. For if the Instruments he uses are not good, the effect of his Advice is lost, and by a mistake in Weight or Measure the Life of the Patient destroy'd.
The Apothecary neglects his duty to the Physician and the Sick: Is rarely in his Shop, prepars few Medicines, but buys them abroad under great uncertainties, and trusts raw unexperienc'd Apprentices to select the Ingredients and measure the Proportion in the Prescript.
The people, who are not acquainted with the Dispensary, of two Evils, as they think, choose the least. They believe, that, by using the Apothecary, they save the Physicians Fee, tho the Medicines excessively rated, and brought in little parcels to be taken often, rise to a greater sum, (by three in four in most cases) than both the Advice and Physick necessary in most Distempers.
The Associate Party of the College often feeling the Apothecaries power in the Families, readily come in, or are forced to serve under them, on condition they forward with all their Arts the Increase of the Bill, and raise their Ability to advise to an equal pitch with their own: By both which the Apothecaries Interest is more confirm'd and improv'd.
Your Design therefore is, to revive the former Practice of Physick, particularly that of Dr. Lower and Dr. Sydenham, who had much greater success with fewer Remedies, then are now upon these different projects forc'd upon the people: or rather to expose to publick view, the methods, the Physicians at this time and the Apothecaries, use to themselves and Friends, of avoiding carefully the excess, by which the most innocent things, when Nature is disorder'd, become destructive.
You design to convince the People by their experience, that the most useful and effectual remedies are of no great price.
The Publick will soon become sensible that the Expence in almost all Diseases of each day will be of one, two, or three Shillings, instead of so many pounds, at the usual rates of the modern management, and that their Distempers will sooner yeild to a few well prepar'd College Medicines, than to the common decay'd, vitious, and adulterate of the Shops, and that the Physician's Reward and the Expence of what he advises, comes far short of the Sum Total of a long Bill.
Your Dispensary therefore cannot fail of the Universal approbation, especially when the people shall reflect, that in many cases they have us'd themselves, the method you recommend: preparing in their Houses the white Decoction, purging Infusions of Rhubarb, and Sena: or using the common Cordial Waters, Spirits and Tinctures, bought of the Druggist, Chymist, or Whole-sale-Shop.
But when its use shall become more publick, your generous Charity and regard to Mankind, will be loudly applauded; and the advantage from it to this City allowed to be of greater extent, than all the Royal and munificent Hospitals in Europe.
We could take this short view of the present and the future state of Physick (which is obvious to every one, who will consider his own Interest, or not be very unwilling to be inform'd) but because it is an Affair of the greatest concern of our Life. Your Friends oblig'd me to consult you, and report to them your Opinion of the greivous Distemper and the worst most probable methods of curing it, with an unanimous resolution to support and encourage a Design, by which all Conditions of Men are equally oblig'd.
You prepar'd me to receive the dismal Account of the barbardous treatment of the Sick, by a Preliminary Postulatum, which no reasonable Person can refuse to allow, that the Zeal and Concern the Dispensary Physicians express to relieve the Publick, ought not to be less, than is justly expected by every particular, when he commits his Health and Life to the Care and Integrity of his Physician.
I am afraid, my memory has not retain'd the whole, your information consisting of so many parts: But these have made on me too great an Impression, to be easily forgotten.
That we are more impos'd on, than any other Nation in the World, in all the Arts, which relate to Health and Life.
That the common and most useful Remedies are put on the people at a rate in the most fifty times, in many other one hundred times more, then their intrinsick value.
That the exorbitant Expense ruines the Poor, deters them and the Wealthy from a just care of their Health, to avoid the oppressive treatment in subsequent Diseases.
That to hide these Exactions from the people, the Apothecaries allow none to practice with them, but those Physicians who betray their Profession, countenance the use of a vast quantity of Physick, destructive to Health, and support the exorbitant rates in the Bill.
That the Physicians are by them brought into all the Families, even those, in which the Publick is greatly concern'd, whose most distinguishing Character is taken from their Zeal to serve their Interest.
Writing well is the Language for writing a very long Prescription; so much of it is for the Patient, the larger part is the Bribe or gratuity to these New Solicitors, who cannot fail; when they assume the power to govern and command (in the Physick business) all their Customers.
The esteem of the Profession is sunk by the Scandal of all the Deaths in the Town thrown on the Physicians, who are rarely consulted, but when the Case is made desperate by the Apothecary. The Patient therefore takes the Prognostick of Death from the change of Advice, and is depriv'd of that Assurance, which is the greatest support in Sickness, as in War, from the opinion of the Generals Conduct from former Success, and in all other the greatest Affairs.
That the Study of the Art is neglected, because the Diseases are by ill treatment forc'd into unnatural Symptomes, and to differ from all these, your Authors treat of. There are in all the Books of Physick no Cases of Distempers manag'd by an Apothecary, by almost one common random method, your Writers having been careful in this particular to conceal the Infamy of the People and your Profession.
You perceiv'd my Surprize, and prevented my Reflection on the College, that they had not long since interpos'd to prevent the ruine of the People and themselves, by presenting me with the Papers publish'd by the President and Censors, and that lately concerning the Dispensary, subscrib'd by more than forty of the first Contributors. You pointed to me the Paragraphs which justifie, and support all the Articles of Impeachment. The account of the erection of the Dispensary at the desire of the City must silence even the Apothecaries, as well as the unwary Opposers, whose interest is procur'd by it. I observ'd its now almost ten years since, that a Committee of the Honest part of the College had expos'd these Grievances to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and had afterward at several times convinc'd them of the necessity of removing the oppression the Publick had long felt and complain'd of. It was concluded, that the Physicians should rate the price of the Medicines in his Prescription. This was haughtily rejected by the Company. At the meeting in their Hall some months after, a small number of the younger Apothecaries offering to comply with it, were compell'd with Threats of the worst usage in their Society, to retract and withdraw their promise. The Committee of the Aldermen and Commons proposed: (the Apothecary thus flying of from that as necessary as reasonable Proposal) That the College would provide a Repository of Medicines, which will have and may justly claim (especially after twenty thousand Bills made up there) their Regard and Protection.
The Governours of our Hospitals, who give their charity in directing the charity of the Founders in their respective Houses, where the health of some Hundreds is provided for, cannot observe the calamities of many Thousands without concern, and their Endeavour to promote their relief. Must we not conclude our selves Parties and Accessaries to the ruine of the Poor, who beside the pain and dread of the event of the Disease, are under the fear of spending their whole Substance, in one sickness, and being absolutely undone? They are often releast from the Distemper by the strength of Nature and their Constitution, and under the fear of Arrests or in Prison for a Bill of the then useless Physick above their Ability to discharge. The condition of the Wealthy is equally piteable, and as much wants redress. The Ship cast on the Shoar is fill'd not with design to save but plunder: More Art shewen to raise the Bill, than to recover the sick Person. Declining Nature loaded hour after hour, the complaining or refusing Stomach forc'd to submit by cramming in more, and Life overcome by Surfets of too many Courses of Boles and Juleps.
The Laws of the last Age foresaw and provided against these vile abuses, but our Laws are subject to the same Diseases with our selves, or are falln into the Infirmity of old Age, to be regardless of others concerns, as they are neglected by them. 'Tis true, the Magistrate worthily shews his care of the publick in little things, adjusting the Measures and Scales, and the orderly enquiry into the goodness of the common Liquors.
I suggested to you, and you allow'd it, that the Faculty could not want the Art of relieving it self: but you reminded me, that one Party turns its Force against the other, and like a vitious Composition of Ingredients of opposite qualities, had no Power or Vertue to subdue the Epidemick Malignity.
Its allow'd, that from one Absurdity admitted, many others inevitably follow, as one Cause produces many Effects.
The great Increase of Apothecaries is evidently the cause of all the present Grievances to the Profession of Physick, to Themselves and the People.
They are become one Thousand, including the Partners, more then ten to one Physician. The regulated Cities abroad allow no more, then can readily make up the Physicians Directions, in the other proportion of one to ten.
The consequence of so great and disproportionate a number is not to be avoided, that nine Hundred of them cannot possibly keep good Medicines in their Shops. For most of the Compositions, and many of the Simples often mov'd in little quantities, are subject to evaporate their most active parts, to corrupt in a little time, and become vappid, or sour, or rotten and stinking. Who will believe, that the simple Waters, Tinctures, Spirits, Powders of volatile parts, Syrups, Electuaries, &c. can wait and keep well, till they have their turn to be us'd, when the Shops are as numerous as the Sick. There must be a quick vent and expence and use of all perishable wares. They must be thrown away and supplied a new, if the Customer cannot be impos'd on. But that experiment shall be sooner made, then a new Preparation.
This the Gentlemen soon observe in a Tavern, where the Draught is not great for want of Customers: and the Ladies see much antiquated Ware in the Mercers Shop not often visited.
Their number obliges 'em in imitation of Hawkers, to be always visiting the Families to recommend the taking Trade in all the easiest Cases, and in other cases to quicken the use of the Boles and Draughts. They are rarely seen attending the business of the Shop. The Prescript of the Doctor and Apothecary himself is left to be made up by the raw heedless Boy, not presumed yet to have Discretion equal to his Master, whose utmost care is required and depended on, where the Patients Life is lost by almost every mistake. For the violent, Vomitive, Corrosive, Chymical Liquours or Powders may be taken down instead of the Cordials of the same Colours. Can the Boy bring his mind to a steadiness to number the drops of Laudanum or the violent Acids, or to weigh to half a grain Opium or Elaterium? Shall the Boy judge, that the languishing Patient, he never saw, must dy by the Apozeme boyl'd in the Port after this or that other Decoction, or that a Copper Vessel with a rising rust of Verdegrise shall make poysonous or vomitive the next Preparation?
The honest Apothecaries lament the difficulties which by the exorbitant numbers are brought on the People and Themselves: That their Medicines cannot be vented while they are good and fit for use.
That the Scent, Palate, Stomach of the Sick must condemn the corrupted stinking Dose, before he can lay it aside. That they are then put on the difficult task of justifying a sour or musty Draught, by arguing against the Senses of the Sick and Attendants. That they and their Servants are barely us'd as Porters, (which gave the Motto, Opiferque per urbem Dicor) sent forward and backward to fetch and carry the Boles and Glasses: that they have not leisure in their Shops to prepare and compound any thing, but buy abroad in the hurry of posting up and down, what e're they can have at the Wholesale.
That they are forc'd to advise against their Conscience, commanded by the Nurses and the People to own themselves as skillful as other Apothecaries, (who undertake any thing,) that they may not forfeit their present and future business.
That to live themselves they must endanger the Life of their Customer, and give oftentimes more than they would use themselves under the same Circumstance. They reflect with Horrour at first, that they violate the Laws of their Country, are subject to legal Fines, and adjudged Felons, if they mistake the Vertue or Dose of the Medicine. That they are oblig'd to set exorbitant prizes to the Poor and Servants, that the Wealthy may not discern the difference, and desire in that case, not to be rais'd so very far above the level with them. They are brought into the sad condition of the French King, who wantonly made his Meals on the raw limbs of his poor Subjects, as you may read the absurd description in the uniform Heroick Poem King Arthur.
The odd confusion of their business perplexes them: to be one hour wiping the blistred part, and clapping on Melilote, then in another Family giving a Glyster: in the next to consider, what to advise in a Malignant Feaver, and in the Convulsions of a Child in another. The last must be done, by the basest perfidiousness of stealing off the File this or that other Physicians Bill, they imagine may happen to hit the Case, and save him the trouble of seeing the Patient.
'Tis obvious, the prodigious number of Apothecaries, who in a few years will naturally increase of more than twice as many, and so forward in a double proportion, will necessarily oblige them to improve the greater vent of Physick, and the higher prizes. They will not be wanting in the perpetual incroachment on the Faculty. They will be always plying in at the Families, to raise and support their Interest, against every thing which is not agreeable to it. They will assume the cures of many Thousands yearly, who would have been sooner well without Physick, to maintain the Title of Dr. given after a strict examination of the Nurse and the Attendants, who first salute them with it, and a Licence to Practice. They will struggle first with their own Fraternity, then the Members of the College, except their Tools the Confederates, while they gratify them, and write as well as can reasonably be expected, till another is known to practice a more profitable way of prescribing.
They will not bear or commend any method of Cure, but where Physick is ordered every Hour, and the management decently prolong'd, especially if the Customer is pleas'd with always mending.
They cannot suffer any Character of a Physician to pass without an Allay and Antidote, who will not justifie his Practice, and all his Medicines with the Air, and the assurance of a common Knight of the Post, and take the death of the Patient on himself. Any Citizen who will give himself the trouble of thinking, will easily hence discern the reason of the perpetual Dissensions of the College. When one party would raise its reputation by serving the Publick faithfully, the other strenuously oppose all Projects of that kind, to merit the favour of the Apothecaries.
The Apostates from their own Profession are not to be inform'd, that the Dignity of the Faculty must sink, when the Physician is forc'd to delude the People, by applauding the unskillful or pernicious Treatment, and for his Fee has all the reproaches of the House and Funeral, when he dares not inform, that the Patient had the fatal stroke already given him, that the Medicines had not their vertue, that the usual mistake of the Apprentice in the change for another, or wrong proportion was the true cause of a now violent, not natural Death, when he rarely treats a Distemper at its beginning, commonly the only time to interpose between Nature and the Disease to any purpose: But is call'd in to no purpose in the end, when all is in confusion, the vigour of Nature spent, or opprest possibly with as many Doses, as you can number Hours in 8 or 10 Days. When he is chiefly impoly'd in worn out and vitiated Constitutions, as a Botcher or Cobler, when Mr. Tompion or any other eminent Artist would reject such a job or work with scorn.
When I went abroad to return the Visits to my Friends, and was recommending the Advantages of the Dispensary, and the Integrity of the Physicians, who are the subscribers to it, you will not easily imagine, how suprising it was to me, that many express'd a Prejudice to it, without desiring to understand the design of it. A notable Company round a Tea-table, had been exclaming, I perceiv'd, a great while against it, and concluded, that they'd go the old way, and expect till it came more in Fashion. That since they did not certainly know, how many had been kill'd by the Apothecary's ill advice or Errors in the Doses of Physick, they were easie enough not to find out new occasions of trouble. That every Fee to the Doctor on many accidents in the Year, went to the Heart: that the Bill at Christmas, tho' long enough to spoil the diversions of the Season, give but one, though a pretty strong Fit; which went off as soon as they could forget it, and came not again till the Year after. That they would not let the Servant go to fetch the things, when they could make the Apothecary do it, and rather their Maids should prattle at home with them, than gossip hours abroad at their Shops. I could only reply, that they themselves approv'd of the design of the Dispensary, when they us'd the Purging Salts, Pearl Juleps, Harts-horn Decoction, or the Elixirs and Spirits of the Vapours, which their Physicians formerly had communicated to them, and which they bought off the Druggist at no great expence. It was allow'd, but extorted from one of the Company with a visible concern in every Face, that the taking of that Tax had necessarily brought on others, and that they paid dearly for those and other Domestick Preparations, if the Distemper requir'd Foreign Assistance, and the Medicines unknown to the Family.
In the other visits, I made that day, I was startled at many scandalous Reports of the same form and contrivance industriously spread abroad against the Subscribers to, and the present management of the Dispensary. The first I contemn'd as malicious and senceless Imposthures; They had too much Poetry in 'em to pass for truth. The other part appear'd ridiculously little and very easily refuted. That their Physick is as dear as the Apothecary's, when we experience the difference of 18 or 19 in 20. That their goodness is justify'd by the Subscribers care in the choice of every Drug, which they buy at the highest prizes. And their Reputation is answerable for every Accident or Defect. That they have not Servants sufficient, when they can easily increase the Number from 3 or 4 to 10: and the want of Hands, supposes the growing business equal to defray the Charge of more. These Reflections are for the most part very awkardly made, there wanting the Assurance and self perswasion and concern, which becomes a Satyrist. If the subscribers have not the University Education or Capacity, for their Employment, they may consult the Apothecary's list of the College, and find out better, if they can. If they destroy all their Patients, and the Apothecaries and their Confederates never fail of success, the want of Advocates will prevent the tryal and nonsute the Debate. If the remedies are not good, the abus'd People will readily and seasonably complain. If they have no business, the Dispensary can have none, and will be only a Collection of Pots and Glasses, and the Servants sufficient to shew the useless Repository.
The People will in a little time apprehend, that their Interest, in relation to Health, and Expence, is the subject of the Controversy, and that every one is both Judge and Party, and has power to give a definitive sentence, as far as himself is concern'd. Here is no Law to be enacted by Majority of Voices, or any Restraint to be put on the Liberty of any particular person. He need not express a childish dread, as if to be Kidnapt away, and us'd in the most terrible manner all his life, and never more to be Master of himself.
But the Apothecaries complain with no Decorum, and the worst grace imaginable. You (to please the People) make your selves as like the Apothecaries, as you can, with the only difference of a Print from a Copper plate, where the figures are exactly the same, only look a different way. You are become Doctor-Apothecary, and they have been these 40 years Apothecary-Doctors. You restore the ancient and cautious Practice by providing effectual Remedies, and preventing many deadly mistakes. The Apothecary leaves his concern to the wholesale trade and his Boy, is always abroad giving advice. Can any two things be more alike in the outward feature and appearance? Can they be justly displeas'd with you, who give your care and countenance to the trade of making Medicines? As the Apothecary in return puts a value upon yours, in pleasing himself with the Practice of Physick. They reply They are forc't to it by the importunity of the People, so are you by the same importunity to send your Prescript to the College, by those, who like a good Medicine, at the Intrinsick value. They are afraid the Dispensary will in time ruine the Apothecaries Trade, who are industriously every day destroying your Profession. You are invaded with vast Numbers, like a Russian Army, who slay without Quarter, reserving only a few slaves to be cut of, if they bear not their Chains easily, or scruple any work they are put upon.
In other Conversations I had better success: I had perswaded not a few to consult those of the Society they esteem'd, at the approach of the Spring. I have had their thanks with large Accounts of the difference of the old and new Practice of Physick. So many Converts in my Neighbourhood brought on me the resentment of my former Apothecary. He expostulated with me the ill consequence to their Trade with the most bitter and envenom'd Reflections on the Dispensary, and the Promoters of it. You shall judge from his manner of arguing the Case. We do govern and command all the Families in the City. They believe us in every thing, to the advancement of our Trade, and the lessening the College Interest. When the Men are abroad, or not in the sick Chamber, we can recommend what Physician we please and decry the opposite Party. Do you believe we will spare one of them? Here he took out hastily of his Pocket the scandalous List Printed at the desire of the Master and Wardens of the Apothecaries Company, where our honest Physicians are distinguish't by Marks from their honest Slaves, which being promiscuous in the College order, he blundred thrice, and shew'd me for Villains, those of their own Confederacy. But after some time he recover'd and told me, they were resolv'd to maintain the reputation of what they had hitherto done, as well as their Advantages over the College for the future. Many years since there has not been more than five Physicians, who have been rais'd but by serving us. They are call'd by us Topping Physicians, because we put 'em on the People, as we please. You may observe, there are now in the Town of several Sortments and different Abilities, who pass by our Artifices for the greatest Men. Has not one risen considerably by our Favour, who has employ'd much of his time in writing 3 Folio Poems, which have been exploded by his Brother Poets and Physicians for the vilest bombast, which is now meant by lofty Poetry, every expression relating to Physick or Philosophy prov'd in Print to be triflingly absurd or false, and judg'd so even by us? Do no several of the College come over to us, and betray all that passes there? The rest are afraid, and dare not be honest and just to their Patients, fearing to incur our displeasure? Will we, think you, pardon him, who cures a Feaver, at the rate of 1 or 2 pounds, when our Friends, will raise the Bill for us to 10, 20 or 40? He that brings in the Fidler to the Company, will make him play what Tunes and as often as he pleases. What does the Dispensary pretend to impose on the Publick, that we are not useful out of our Shops, who give Glysters, dress Blisters, and Bleed when its easie, and like to have no ill consequence. I would not further concern my self, but only put him in mind, that one Sex was accommodated without them, and that the other was properly the business of the Surgeon, who attends to these and the greater Cases of Surgery abroad without impediment to any part of his Profession. Besides, that the Blisters often inflam'd or corroded with the Acrimony of the Humours, or wanting to be drawn to evacuate more freely, required more then the common treatment of the Melilote Plaister.
You had, I remember, made me very sensible, how much that excellent and most useful Art of Surgery was invaded by those bold Pretenders to every thing they do not understand. They Bleed without suspecting the Nerve or Artery may ly in the way. They apply to Inflammations or other Tumours, and keep in the putrid matter till the Sinuous, Fistula, or rotten bone gives pain loud enough to call the Surgeon.
Having had various Fortune abroad, I remembred I was in the Evening to meet a select Company of Merchants, and other Eminent Citizens. I determin'd to ask their assistance and council. I shew'd them all your Papers, and laid before 'em in all the Informations relating to the College, and our own immediate Interest. Some were discoursing of the Treaties abroad, and the common danger of our Liberty and Property from another sort of Invader. But at mine and our Friends request who were there, we came to debate of our more immediate concern, leaving the other to the Physicians, proper in those Cases. I was desired by them to give you a farther trouble, that you would remove the common opprobrium on the Profession, that it wants certainty and acts often by conjecture: And that more scandalous, that the Apothecary by seeing the Patient and you at the Bed-side is able to give Physick himself. And (after our Assertion of the cheapness of the best Medicines, and some contests about it) that you would, as in our Papers for sale by the Candle, give a pretty near Estimate of the value of every Preparation and Composition or Simple now us'd in Physick.
We must wait for this Account, upon which the whole Controversy depends, but the Company would not doubt of the easie prizes of the most effectual Remedies, (as are fit for the use of that Prince now the regard of all Europe) many of us having us'd of several kinds, of which the Dose was of no great value. After having lamented the miserable Condition of the Poor, and the vile treatment of all others these last 40 years, they were pleas'd they had now a prospect of better and more humane usage. They resolv'd, they would make all their Acquaintance sensible of the generous design of the Dispensary, and engage 'em to the most industrious publication of its use, the only Panacea to the many Calamities of the sick. That they would not doubt to convince the most hitherto obstinate or heedless opposers of it. That the Apothecary must be oblig'd to keep his Shop, that all his Medicines may be made at home, and dispenc't with his own hand, or under his careful inspection. That his Apprentice may be imploy'd in the Shop to learn his Trade, and to be taken of from the giddy ambition of aping a Profession a little too far remov'd from his. That our Servants shall be constantly sent for the Physick, the Directions being left at our Houses by the proper hand, that each of us sending our Porters, the hurry and confusion may be taken off from the Apothecary and his Servants, by which, many Patients Physick being convey'd at one time, the deadly Accidents which now frequently happen, may be avoided. Our Messenger will find the Shop sedately forwarding their important affair, every one will wait the mixture for his Master, by which the possibility of a mistake will be prevented.
The College will be safe from the temptations they now ly under, and from being in so large numbers debaucht from their vertue, and their indispensable duty to their Patient, which branches into every distinct regard of his Welfare. And, whereas the present one Thousand have 2 or 3 Apprentices each, which multiplying in the same Proportion, must raise the prizes of Physick, and the Quantity and the Industry of giving more, to the ruine at last of their credit with the People, there is no other method even to preserve themselves. The Families will then, as formerly, make choice of a Physician from the visible success of his Art, and not with the greatest degree of stupidness, ask the Apothecary to bring one. Since from their numbers they are forc't to make the greatest profit of every Patient, which strong Byass naturally inclines him to a Physician most useful in that case. 'Twas resolv'd, after your answer of the prizes, to oblige the Physician to rate the Prescription sent to the Apothecary at the fairest Profit, to be paid at farthest after the Recovery: And to prevent the sipping of Cordials and Pearl Juleps, as Usquebaugh at the Coffee-house, upon every little humour of taking, promoted by the casual visit, and encourag'd by the mean and vile custom of going upon Tick till Christmas. A modest Gentleman gave his Assent with some doubt of success, that he would at home propose these considerations to the best advantage he could.
Another, who sees through the Town, demanded what hope there may be to repell the confidence of the Men of the Bottle, and Wit and Banter, which admire only the childish wantonness of Thought, and the pretty Deviations from good sense, and therefore Character the Men of their Parts and Dress into the publick Esteem. They were left to their Fortune and Experience of others more discerning, and concluded, that the Signature ought to be taken from other affairs of equal concern and importance. The ablest Pilot, is put into the Ship, to be sail'd out or brought into Port. The Gravity, Learning, Application of a Judge is observ'd, when a Cause of Life or Estate is heard before him. We shall then raise our Hope of Recovery, from the manner our Cases will be weigh'd and consider'd, before the Verdict and Judgment shall be given. When you shan't be brought in durante bene placito of the Apothecary, Visitants or the Physick Brokers abroad; and shall not be chang'd and shifted as often as the Symptom, upon the different Projects of particular Interests. We shall know, who merits our gratitude and applause, and shall put down that Infamous Custom of accusing the Physician almost in the Burial Ticket. A Practice too vile to be expos'd, to impute the misfortune to the honest industry of the Physician, when he has not been consulted till the extremity, after many days dosing by our selves and visitants, and the Apothecary, not allowing the fair Inquest of Dissection, which would discover the Passages of the Heart stopt, the Ulcers or Gangrenes of the Viscera. We were agreed to controul our Families, and perswade our Friends to the same Resolutions: and were about to part, when one of our Society, who had been silent some time, exprest himself with some Heat, from the Relation he had to some of the Faculty. Let us not loose this only opportunity of raising the reputation of one of the most useful and learned Professions, when our Interest is inseparable from theirs. Shall we look on unconcern'd, when the Faculty and our selves are enslav'd and opprest by the number of Apothecaries, who were originally their Servants. What is the Mystery but a Mechanick and Handycraft Trade. They act nothing, but by the ordinance and Directions of the Physician. The Medicines, the Shops are furnish'd with, are all from their Appointment. The Drugs are powder'd, boyl'd, distill'd, and mixt together only by their order. What Books or Languages are understood and consider'd by them, but the publick Dispensatory or Receit Book? The Cook, Confectioner or Perfumer have as much pretence to learning, or the knowledge of the uses of what they prepare. Have not our Servants the skill to make up all our domestick collections of Receits, which are many of them the same with theirs? The under Servants to the Chymists Laboratory, while he cleanses the Glasses, and attends the Fires, speedily discerns the Mechanick part of making the Spirits, the Tincture, the Salts: Tho the Design and Process were given by the incomparable Mr. Boyle, or the Faculty, and the uses only known to the sagacious Physician.
We pleas'd our selves at Parting, with the great reputation that worthy Gentleman had given to our Country with the learned of all Nations, which will last with that late Discovery of the Circulation.
THE Physicians Answer to the foregoing Letter.
SIR,
I Perceive you lay the greatest stress on the last Enquiry of the low prizes of Medicines, because you observe that the large Bills of the Apothecary are the best argument with the People of his Ability to advise, and while they believe, the Disease is treated very much by Guess, and on Conjectures, they are not very solicitous, who throws the Dice for their Lives. But you would rather make choice of one, who has made that his only business, had studied and practis'd all the Artifices of making them run to his purpose, than any common Hand. But you will not deny, that every Art has the means to attain its end. This is obvious in every Manufacture which is made better and worse according to the capacity and skill of the Artificer. There are other Arts whose subject is perishable from Causes above the power and controul of the Art, which Events are not justly imputable to the Artist, if he is not visibly deficient in his Skill and Address. Navigation is perform'd by Rules, which will conduct a Ship the Voyage to the Port design'd. But violent Storms, and Rocks undiscover'd, the springing of a Plank, or weakness of the Fabrick may loose the Ship, tho not the reputation of the Master. The Husbandman and Gardiner act by the instruction of their Arts with prospect of success, unless extreme Rains, or Drowth, or Blasts destroy their Hopes. The Physician pretends to know with as much certainty, how Animal Life may be preserv'd, and by what means endanger'd, as they the Health and growth of the Vegetables they are conversant with. You may make an Estimate, to what proportion Animal Life is capable of being prolong'd, by observing that the Periods of the Lives of many Quadrupeds and Birds are suppos'd to be distinctly known.
That of Man is the longest Period, and from Galen's observation that of the Britains of his time. This is particularly remarkable in Man, that he is form'd not only to live to great Age in all the habitable Climates of the Earth. If in Navigation the Vessel is necessarily mov'd by the Tide and Wind, turn'd and govern'd by the Rudder to a certain Course. The Powers of the Body act as Mechanically and by the natural necessity in Health: So in the various appearances of Diseases, the Humours are by a natural tendency mov'd to be alter'd or separated. These different methods of Nature constitute so many Species of Distempers, which are truly defin'd and describ'd from the known alterations and symptomes in all the Stages of their Course.
We have the most certain experiences of their Cures from the observation of all Ages. Even these (as Celsus divides them) which are the more latent, as sudden Pestilences and malignant Feavers, discover the ways, by which Nature expels the malignity. All other Distempers are from our selves, of our own making, by Intemperance, Luxury, and the gratifications of our Senses, or are from the same causes ex traduce deliver'd down to us. Their force and power to corrupt our Constitutions is demonstrated, by the common observation, that all the Families of the Rich (whose Wealth is not so valuable as they imagine) are in few Years extinct, and the Recruits of them made from labour, Industry and Temperance, which refine and purge the Humours to their natural purity and vigour.
You cannot doubt the efficacy of the Instruments us'd in Physick, when in many cases the Rich Cordials given improperly, or in large quantities, act as Poysons, and then, in a little longer time, as visibly destroy: when the over dosing the vinous or other Spirits fire and inflame the blood and spirits, when Opiates are able to stop their motions, and the Barke can check the ferment of a Feaver, which cannot be cur'd but by the expulsion of the venom. The effects of its Vomits, Purgers, Diaphoreticks are own'd by the vulgar experience. The late but surer force of Labour, Temperance, Rest have been formerly own'd in the most obstinate Diseases. They are now rejected, as the most nauseous Physick, and the most difficult methods to be comply'd with. I need not acquaint you with the Mineral Waters, which as the Apozemes formerly us'd, are able to cool, dilute, and purify the blood, after it has been heated and corrupted by the modish living of some years before.
Nature discovers to the Physician its surest methods of dismissing the most common Feavers by bleeding, Sweats or discharging the grosser humours by other ways, which it chooses according to the circumstances of every Disease.
In the more difficult, where it is the more opprest, it gives Indications or Signs, how it would be afflicted or directed, at least our Magazines of observations cannot fail to furnish in all the cases parallel to them.
But if the Patient is overheated and surfeted by too many Medicines, if the Salutary Looseness be stopt too soon, the humours fixt by Opiates or the Barke, its imputable to the Adviser, but not to the Art, which has given the strictest cautions upon the like Conjunctures. Its not a Reproach to the Art, if there are wanting Remedies equal to the rage or violence of some Diseases, which will not wait the effect, or are above the force of any known Drug, which can be brought to oppose them; any more, then to the Statesman, General, Councellour, when he cannot always warrant Success.
When after the steady use of Liquors, which give a briskness to, but inflame the Spirits, spend the strength of the blood, by heating it, and give Life a pleasanter but quicker motion, the Liver and the other parts shall be made scirrhous and abcess't, the Omentum made rotten, and Fibres of all the Body flaccid, shall the Art be accus'd, that it cannot keep the Machine a going, where every wheel is broken?
That the tendencies and events of the Symptomes, and the Issue of the Disease may be known, and a probable Prognostick given, is own'd by the forwardness of the common People to give their Opinions. How often have you believ'd the presumptuous Valuer of himself, who doubts every ones knowledge but his own, when he has assur'd you, that if he had come sooner, the Patient should not have dy'd, and that another would expire the next day, if his Advice had been then wanting? The writers of Government prove the Maximes of State, from the receiv'd Axioms of Physick. That one part overnourish't starves and enervates the other. That when every part disregards the interest of the whole, its dissolution is as certain, as when every part is vitiated in a shatter'd Constitution.
If therefore a Physician is suppos'd to have learnt, whatever has been observ'd, of the different affections and disorders from Childhood in all the advances to old Age, of the Sexes in all their Circumstances: how the Seasons, Climates alter us, and what changes are made by all sorts of Diet: to have noted the use and site of all parts of the Body by Anatomy: the vertues of Medicines by the tryals Chymistry affords, but especially the Histories of the almost innumerable Deseases given by our Authors, their Causes, their Access, Progress, and Events, the Consequence of all methods and all Medicines: when he frequently reflects on them, and compares them nicely with the case under his care, you will not oppose to him a Rival, who has not had a Philosophical Education, or the Knowledge of any Language, in which Physick is treated. When you have determin'd, what time is requir'd, to collect from many Writers whatsoever is useful to the safe and successful practice of Physick; I would desire you to state the years, in which any thing certain can be acquir'd from the Prescripts of the Art, without the Reasons given or any Register of the success. You will not permit your Servant to keep your Accounts by Memory, or think that the Rules of Physick are less numerous, or of less moment, then the particulars of his Receits and Payments. When Nature, ipsa suis pottens opibus, nihil indiga nostri, throws of the common Disorders of its self, and is able to bear (an argument of its strength) any sort of Physick given at random and at hazard; the Apothecary plies the Patient with Medicines he does not want, to pay the trouble of Attending, magnifies the Disease and his skill, and robs the Rich of the knowledge of the goodness of his Constitution. In these the most usual Illnesses the Physician shews his Art by prognosticating, with Integrity, the assur'd success; which is a richer Cordial, then the Shops afford, and merits his Reward, like the Statesman, when the Publick is in perfect tranquillity. But when there shall be Nodus vindice dignus, when in the Crisis dubiis trepidat victoria pennis, when the experienc't Physician will doubt, whether Nature acts to its own preservation, or wants the Assistance of Art, will examine the effect of one Medicine, before he risques the use of others to the same or other purposes: The ignorant and the less fearful Adviser will not loose the opportunity of filling the Patient and the Chamber, with the certain prospect of his own advantage. These are the Cases, in which all the severest and most just observations of the present and of former Ages must be consulted. The least errour make the Feaver deadly, tho not be discovered, but by the most consummate Artists. They only can discern, when Nature attack't in all parts, the spirits wasted, and the blood exhausted, is easily overborn by an Active Cordial, or which diverts it from its only method of expelling the Disease. If it endeavours one Crisis, which the Medicines contradict, it has not time or power to resume it. The Head receives the Humours: which were moving to the Bowels or the Pores: Or the inflaming Alexipharmic by its agitation mixes agen the matter, which was prepared to be separated, and ejected. The People indeed are satisfi'd with the Apothecaries Skill, who hears sometimes the Physicians discourse upon the Distemper. Will you imagine, he designs to give the surest Instructions to his Scholar, who will set up as Master in the Art the next Hour, with sufficient instructions to act in his stead? But he makes up the Note and sees the operation: The Instrument maker will not pretend to use them, as the Surgeon, or to cut for the Stone, tho he made the Knife and the Forceps. I will, after you have well consider'd it, desire your opinion, whether, if you practice Physick, you could communicate a Specifick very efficacious Medicine to the Apothecary, which he would instantly make up for every Customer in the same, or as he imagines, not much differing Cases. Will any Merchant, or any Artificer expose the Secret of his Business to every one, who would desire to use it to his own profit? But we cannot discover our Secrets, to any but our own Profession, which is the manner of applying the Medicine to the latent exigence of the Disease. Some Feavers will go off being only left undisturb'd. Water is the Richest Cordial in others, and the high Rich Composition procures to others a certain Malignity. Will you value the Surgeon from the tipping or ornaments of his Instruments, or from his Judgment and Steadiness of his Hand in the use of them? The most common and simple may have a better effect, then from the most pompous Apparatus, as our Wines and the vulgar Nourishments are allow'd to be more wholsome, without the hurtful Artifices of the Sellar or Cookery.
The few of our Costly Ingredients, have been kept in use to cover the fraud of vast Exaction, or as they have crept into Mode and Fashion, but especially because we please our selves, that they are peculiarly design'd for the use of the Grand Monde, while we pity the little People, who, we imagine, cannot live without them. But Providence has otherwise provided in its great Hospital the World. We are all upon the level there. Sickness, as well as Death, lays a side the markes of Distinction. The Poor do not want so much as the Rich, but may have the most-valued simple Remedies, and the best Chymical or Galenical Preparations at an Expence, they or their Patrons with an easie charity may bear.
To demonstrate this the more clearly, we will first remove the Rubbish and lay before you the Simples of the greatest Vertue, and the best and most useful Preparations, supported not only by the best tryals of Chymistry, but constant experience.
Gold, the great Idol of Mankind, must be rejected, as useless: while it makes the World restless and anxious to obtain it, it has it self no active parts or energy to procure any effect. Its not dissolvable by any Humour in the Body. Nothing there can alter, it or be alter'd by it. The compact, heavy, sluggish parts resist the impression of every Animal Agent, which on the other side are secure from any power it has. The Golden Pill in the twisting of the Bowels by its weight only may open the Passage, but it costs you only for the use of it, having lost no grains of its worth, the Leaf Gold on Boles, or Electuaries, or Pills divert the mind from the Tast, only by the pleasure of seeing it, but it adds nothing to their vertue, and only a trifle to the expence. The leaf may ly on the mouths of the vessels undissolv'd, and it prevents the dissolving of purging and alterative Pills, if well gilded, unless to your good Fortune, that the Cover happens to be broken in swallowing.
Bezoar is a stony Concretion of an Animal, despis'd and rejected by most Physicians, who think on what they advise. If it be well powder'd, it may pass out better, then the larger Stones of the Kidney and Bladder. It has indeed the use of the Philosophers stone, procures Gold or much Silver, to every thing, where it is a part, as in Gascon's Powder: it adds to the Dose only the value of two Pence, but rises the Bill even to the pleasure of paying a great Sum, that they were thought worthy of it. The very name of Bezoardick makes the cheapest Boles and Juleps, pass of at any price, which shall be put upon them. The large round Pearl looks well on a Healthy Skin, but the History which tells us, that Cleopatra drank one very large in a health to Anthony, does not instruct us, that her Health was improv'd by it. The Pearl Juleps have their value from the Cordial water and white Sugar, and are put upon the Infatuated People promiscously in all the Constitutions and very different Complaints. They may take it plentifully for the future, if the lowness of the price does not destroy its Cordialness, being only 3 Pence or 4 in the Dose.
Ambergrise and Musk are offensive to many from the name as well as scent, they corrupt the blood and the spirits, and by altering the Breath make the use in Perfumes more necessary. The Confections and Waters are more wholsome without them, and they are therefore omitted by express order. Tho', where they are not, by a Magical power, they make a cheap Cordial sell as high, as if it had been vitiated by them.
We leave the Diamonds and Rubies to these, we are not concern'd with our other precious Stones, as we call 'em, cost very little, and are worth nothing.
The Hyacinth, Smaragd, Topaz finely powder'd, are as useful as glass well prepar'd. But the famous Confection of Hyacinth sells only two pence in the Dose. This is true in Oyl of Cinamon, or the other Chymical Oyls, which are given but to few drops at a time, to be esteem'd at the most inconsiderable price in so small a quantity. The celebrated Balm of Gilead is taken in Drops with Sugar, or mixt with Cordial Powders to be form'd into Pills. All these Drops will rise to about a Farthing each.
Cochineal promises to impart its colour to the blood, and dismiss the paleness of the Cheeks, but we borrow it from the Dyers, at much less cost then the former.
But I divert you from the more pleasant prospect of the Gardens, Feilds, Woods and Rivers, which plentifully afford us, of our own product, the most effectual and certain relief. Their value in the small Quantities us'd at one time are below any Coin we have, and the cooking or preparing subdivided into small Proportions, will not amount to much more.
The Flowers, Fruits and Seeds, the Leaf, the Root, the Wood and Bark are distill'd simply, or with Water or Spirit of Wine, beaten with Sugar into Conserves, or boyl'd into Syrups, compound the Powders, Trochs and Pills, or with Water or Wine make the Decoction or Apozemes.
The Conserves Antepileptick or Cardiac in the Dose are of the price of a Farthing or two.
The Syrups stomachial or Diuretick, not much more.
The Powders Corroborative, or Bezoartick or Antipestilential, are not more than a Penny in the Scruple, or half Dram.
The famous Gascon Powder, without Bezoar, claims but a little more in the Dose then 3 or 4 Pence.
The Cordial waters, Cephalick, Epileptick or Antihysterical, because they are distilled from spirit of Wine, and are therefore used in small Quantities, are not dearer then a Glass of Wine, or the little one of Ratasia. But the Ingredients, better chosen or singly infus'd in a proper simple distilled Water, would prove more Alexiterial, and deserve the title of High Rich Cordial, at a less expence. When you have tasted of the former Cordials, a spoonful in your Friends Chamber, have you not felt in your Stomach the tumult of such a Rabble of the Spices, which being broyl'd by the fire disturb you an hour after, and make you pity his Condition under the often repeated Doses?
The Apozemes Hepatick or Splenetick, or Diuretick, or Sudorifick are made at 2d. 4d. or 6d. the Quart in Spring water, which if divided and sent into little Glasses rise beyond the price of Burgundy.
You may hence judge of our Oyls, Oyntments and Playsters. The Surgeon rewarded for his Skill and his Care, does not put you in mind of the cost, he has been put to, thro' the whole Cure.
You are well acquainted with the prices of all the Drugs imported from abroad, as they are most of the hot spicy Nature, their Dose can be but small and the price proportionable. If many are absurdly joyn'd together, the Quantity of each is so much less. The great Cordial, the Treacle, made of Sixty, most foreign Drugs, does not claim a Penny, every time you use it.
You may judge of the easie Expence of what we advise in sickness by another View, that of the various Operations.
The famous Vomitive, a Penny, the Tartar Emetic esteem'd the better, not a Farthing, that of the Salt no more: the Oxymel for that purpose the value of the first.
There are many sorts of Pills for the Head, Stomach, Bowels of different force, they all agree in the price of a Penny. The Alterative, Nephritick, Antihysterical Pills made of cheap Powders, with the Gums dissolv'd, or a Syrup, are valuable only for the success.
I need not inform you how easily the Filings of Steel, or open'd by an Acid or the Fire, are procur'd. If you infuse them in Wine or distill'd Waters, with the bitter Plants, or boyl it with Sugar to a Syrup, You readily estimate the Expence of a Quart.
All the Tribe of the Ecphracticks, or Deobstruents and Aperitives, either vegetable or mineral, the other Incrassating or Astringent agree in their great use, tho' of contrary effects, and in the almost inexpressible cheapness.
It must be own'd, that the Purges of Rhubarb, &c. are otherwise to be priz'd, but that Remedy is us'd but once in the Day, and not hastily repeated, and excludes all others: the Mode brings in an Hyprotick, which detains the inwardly separated Humours, and binds the Bowels many days after.
Out of these Drugs many kinds of Chymical Medicines are prepar'd, at the expence of only Fire, and the use of the Glasses, in great Quantities.
If you pay for Spirit of Harts-horn, sal Armoniac, sal vol Oleos, the volatile Salts, the Tinctures of Castor, Amber, Saffron, Myrrh, or any of the compound Elixirs, the Acid Spirits of Niter, Sulphur, Vitriol, or their Antagonists the fixt Salts of Tartar, Wormwood, or the associated vitriolate Tartar, and the other Digestives: One Shilling or two, or in the other as many Pence, the Ounce, you will with the water, the Vehicle, after many days using them, compute the expence of your every days Physick. The Porter who drinks a Cup of the stronger Ale, instead of many of the smaller, prudently saves his Time and his Pocket, and is at a greater charge than the Patient.
If in a Feaver or Small-pox, &c. the Physician cools the Blood, and temperates the Heat, shall the Apozeme of almost the sallet Herbs, with the cheap sweetning Powders, and the cheaper sal Prunel, &c. And a Julep of the simple waters, made to taste a little of a Cordial water, raise the cost higher, then the common supports in our Health.
If the Blood and Spirits are opprest in the malignant, shall the Treacle, Mithridate and Diascordium, with the Aromaticks, Alexiterial Roots, or the Cordial Species, or the volatile Salts or Castor, or even Bezoar, be esteem'd from the any other Topick then their effect of sweating or raising the Heat of the Blood: especially if the Patient be not incessantly ply'd, and the Physician will have the common care of observing, when he has done enough for one day, and will give the Patient a little Rest, before he sets him another Task: Unless he orders on more Cordials, to produce the Fee to himself, more than any advantage to the Sick.
If the Feaver truly intermits, and has no malignity, or deadly Consequence to be fear'd from stopping the Ferment, you may use the Bark only prepar'd, by being powder'd, which you know costs no more than the Wine you drink it with.
I have heard you extoll from your Experience in Colical and Nephritick Pains, the wonderful force of Opiates. 'Tis true, that Plant has no equal among the Vegetables, nor does any metal or mineral pretend to rival it. But the richest Preparation, either solid or liquid, this great Anodyne raises no inquietude upon any other Circumstance. The poorest may have this Nepenthe, as well as the richest, from a small Charity, which will give the Donour, the Ease it procures to the Patients Pain.
Is it not therefore demonstrated, that in sickness no Constitution can bear the use of more then 2 or 3 Shillings value in a Day. The dearest Cordial Waters and Alexiterial Powders, cannot in that time be us'd above that price, without inflaming the blood and spirits into a Delirium and Phrensy, or forcing our common putrid Feavers to Malignant and Pestilential Symptoms.
The milder Diaphoreticks and Diureticks or Alteratives, do not pretend to be rated with the other, but in our most common Feavers, these assist Nature, and the others destroy it.
Where's then the Mystery of raising the Bill to one, two, three or four Pounds each day of its continuance? By a new invented or much improv'd Artifice of raising the part equal to the whole, and sending in the Apozeme or Julep divided into little Parcels, which your Family would as well bottle out into smaller glasses, at the rate of the whole Mixture.
The Electuary shall be sold at good profit by the Apothecary at half a Crown. But the Boles out of this Electuary in a snipt Paper are full as much each of them, tho' that affords to Children twenty Boles.
But the Contrivance lately brought into Practice of giving in a parcht Mouth, and fur'd Throat, and nauseating stomach, an ill tasted Bole, when the languishing and loathing Patient can swallow nothing but Liquids, has been reserv'd for this Age of ours, and can last no longer. This Bole of a fulsome Conserve or Treacle is to be taken every third, fourth, or sixth hour, which dispells all Rest and Composedness, the great Restorers, by the Torments, and struggles of forcing it into the stuff't Throat and Stomach, which rises against it.
There's a little Julep ready to wash it down and reward him for his trouble. When the Bole cannot easily, be taken down, its impertinently half mixt in a spoon in the Chamber, which should have been brought well compounded, only so many distinct Articles in the Bill are to be preserv'd. This is of the greatest Consequence to the Apothecary, because the Town has been us'd to pay 2s. 6d. for each Bole, and not much less for the little Draught, to cleans the mouth after it. This Advice was therefore given to a Physician at his first entrance on the Stage, that he should order a Bole, with a Draught every fourth hour, which, however it far'd with the Patient, would recommend him to the Apothecaries, and thence publick esteem for that service.
The honest Physician mixes the Bole and Julep together, that the feeble restless Patient may drink his Cordial to revive or compose him, without the dusturbance of taking it at twice, and with difficulty the other way.
I presume you will allow the Corollary, that by much Physick divided into little parcels, rated so high, the Apothecary has in the reward of his Attendance (which by the Physician is often excus'd) much greater Fees, often trebly or quadruply more then the Faculty. You will not therefore be surpriz'd, if it be asserted, that in a Bill of ten Pounds nine are the reward of his Advice and Attendance, and in all the other sums proportionably.
The People must accuse their own Conduct, who never gratifiying the Apothecarys visit, oblige him in the Case, where one Medicine removes the Distemper, to bring in for every 3 or 4 Hours, and several Days, as much as will answer one of the Ends he proposes to himself. Can he thus neglected by his Customers, with safety to himself advise the Waters, Milk, Temperance, Repose, Exercise or a peculiar Diet, or the Country Air, by which obstinate Diseases are cur'd: But to the reproach of the Compositions of the Shop.
But what Redress can be expected to all these Grievances?
There must be certain Rates set to all the Medicines, with the greatest encouragement to the Apothecary to prepare them faithfully.
They must bring their number by the most proper Methods to be equal to the occasion the City has of using their Preparations.
The former Antiquated Methods must be reviv'd, by which the People were easie, without the present either suspicions or complaints.
The Physicians lay under no temptations to impose on the Publick. They advis'd at their Houses in the Chronical or less dangerous disorders, and distinguish't in their visits the differences of the Condition of the Persons and Diseases; arriv'd to a Reputation, not by the basest Arts, but their care and the merit of their Success.
THE END.
------

