LONGITUDE To be found out with A new Invented Instrument, BOTH BY SEA and LAND.
ALSO, Some Reasons for finding it thereby, extracted from the Three Years Observations made at Islington, by Dr. Edmund Halley, Savilian Professor of Geometry in Oxford, for knowing the true Place of the Moon, and which now are inserted in Mr. Street's Caroline Tables. WITH A better Method for discovering Longitude, than that lately propos'd by Mr. Whiston and Mr. Ditton.
------
Written by R. B. Secretary to the Honourable Sir Francis Wheeler, when Admiral and General in an Expedition to Martineco.
------
London: Printed for F. Burleigh in Amen Corner. 1714.
------
------
TO THE READER.
SInce an Act of Parliament is past for the great Encouragement of that Person who shall first find out the Longitude of Places by Sea or Land, several Eminent Men excellently Skill'd in the Mathematicks are putting their Wits to work for a Discovery of that Secret, which will be highly Beneficial to the whole World. I wish, for the good of all Trading Nations, Improvement of Navigation, and absolute Perfection of Cosmography, that whosoever attempts the Invention of Longitude, may be successful in his Noble Undertaking; but hitherto the Methods propos'd by Mr. Whiston, Mr. Ditton, and Mr. Hobbs, are far from compleating their Design; and if they make no better Offers to the Honourable Commissioners appointed by the State for the Discovery of Longitude than they have hitherto, all Hopes of their discovering it may be laid aside for good and all. The Notions of Mr. Hobbs are very absurd, and the Lemmata or Propositions of the other Two Gentlemen very insignificant.
If what the learned Dr. Brown says in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica be true, it is vain for any Man to strive to find out Longitude; his Words are these. "There is no East and West in Nature, nor are those absolute and invariable, but respective and mutable Points, according unto different Longitudes, or distant Parts of Habitation, whereby they suffer many and considerable Variations. For first, unto some, the same Part will be East or West in respect of one another; that is, unto such as inhabit the same Parallel, or differently dwell from East to West; thus as unto Spain, Italy lieth East, unto Italy, Greece, unto Greece Persia, and unto Persia China; so again unto the Country of China, Persia lieth West, unto Persia Greece, unto Greece Italy, and unto Italy Spain; so that the same Country is sometimes East and sometimes West, and Persia tho' East unto Greece, yet is it West unto China. Unto other Habitations the same Point will be both East and West, as unto those that are Antipodes, or seated in Points of the Globe diametrically opposite; so the Americans are Antipodal to the Indians, and some part of India is both East and West unto America, according as it shall be regarded from one side or the other, to the Right or to the Left; and setting out from any middle Point, either by East or West, the distance unto the Place intended is equal, and in the same space of Time in Nature also performable. To a Third that have the Poles for their Vertex, or dwell in the Position of a parallel Sphere, there will be neither East nor West, at least the greatest part of the Year; for if (as the Name Oriental implyeth) they shall account that part to be East wherever the Sun ariseth, or that West where the Sun is Occidental or Setteth, almost half the Year they have neither the one nor the other; for half a Year it is below their Horizon, and the other half it is continually above it; and circling round about them intersecteth not the Horizon, nor leaveth any Part for this Compute. And if (which will at first seem very reasonable) that Part should be termed the Eastern Point, where the Sun at the Equinox, and but once in the Year ariseth, yet will this also disturb the cardinal Accounts, nor will it with Propriety admit that Appellation; for that surely cannot be accounted East which hath the South on both sides, which notwithstanding, this Position must have; for if unto such as live under the Pole, that be only North which is above them, that must be Southerly which is below them, which is all the other Portion of the Globe beside that Part possessed by them. And thus these Points of East and West being not absolute in any, respective in some, and not at all relating unto others, we cannot hereon establish so general Considerations, nor reasonably erect such immutable Assertions upon so unstable Foundations. Now the Ground that begat or promoted this Conceit, was first a Mistake in the apprehension of East and West, considering thereof as of the North and South, and computing by these as invariably as by the other; but herein, upon second Thoughts, there is a great disparity; for the North and Southern Pole, are the invariable Terms of that Axis whereon the Heavens do move, and are therefore incommunicable and fixed Points whereof the one is not apprehensible in the other; but with the East and West it is quite otherwise, for the Revolution of the Orbs being made upon the Poles of North and South, all other Points about the Axis are mutable; and wheresoever therein the East Point be determined, by succession of Parts in one Revolution every Point becometh the East; and so if where the Sun ariseth, that Part be termed East, every Habitation differing in Longitude, will have this Point also different, in as much as the Sun successively ariseth unto every one."
Indeed I am not of this Gentleman's Opinion, for certainly the World is distinguished by the East, West, North and South Parts, according to these Words of St. John the Divine in his Apocalypse. I saw four Angels stand on the Corners of the Earth. And I saw another Angel come up from the East. Which Text Napier thus paraphrases, Afterward I consider'd, that on all the Four Quarters of the Earth, and I perceived Easterly toward Jerusalem. Therefore I can't be persuaded, but according to the Ptolomean System, the Terrestial Globe must have Positions respecting due North and South, East and West; but was the Hypothesis of Copernicus true, which teaches that the Earth turns round, and the Sun stands still, why then we must grant that there would be no Part of the World fixt to any certain Point of the Compass, and thereupon the Marriners Needle would be of no Use. Though all the Phoenomena's of the Heavens are calculated with little Difference by this System as well as by Ptolomy's, yet is the Assertion of the Earth's Motion abominably false, as may be proved by Divinity as well as Physicks; besides, I do not know why People should make Copernicus the Broacher of this palpable Error, when it first sprung up in the School of Pythagoras, who flourish'd (according to the Chronological Computation of Alstedius) Anno Mundi 3370, which was 2090 Years before the Time of Copernicus; then the same Doctrine was cherish'd by Heraclides Ponticus and Ecphantus, two noted Pythagoreans, to whom afterwards joyn'd themselves Nicetus Syracusanus and Aristarchus Samius; all which have undertaken to defend that the Earth moves circularly, and that this Circumgyration of the Earth causes the Rising and Setting of the Sun, as well as the Moon and Stars. I must acknowledge that Dr. Halley's excellent Observations on the Variation of the Needle from the North is a very good Method for finding out the Longitude, especially in those Parts where that Variation is best known; but by the way give me leave to confess, that from the curious Observations which Dr. Halley made at Islington in the Years 1682, 1683, and 1684, of the true Motion of the Moon, I have so well extracted a Method of my own, for finding out the Longitude of Places which I have experienced, both in Europe, Africk and America heretofore, that I do not doubt of obliging the World shortly with a new Instrument which shall shew Longitude both by Sea or Land, with the same acility and Exactness as the Quadrate doth Latitude, when the Sun shall shine at a certain Hour in that Part of the World, where you shall take your Observation; and till such an Instrument is found out, which any Person of the meanest Capacity may know the Use of in 15 Minutes, if he understands but a little Arithmetick, all other ways hitherto invented for this most necessary Work are uncertain, and must be perform'd by such Astronomical Methods which is above the reach of every Person who is not well Skill'd in the Mathematicks: And as for the other Methods for discovering Longitude by the Variation of the Needle, Use of Clocks and Watches at Sea, and the LogLine or dead Reckoning, they are more uncertain and inaccurate. But as for my Method peruse what follows.
R.B.
------
------
Longitude to be found out with an Instrument, by Sea and Land, &c.
OF all the Attempts which have been made hitherto by ingenious Men, for the Invention of Longitude, no Problem hath been more Erroneous and Ridiculous than that of late propos'd by William Whiston, M.A. some time Professor of the Mathematicks in the University of Cambridge, and Humphry Ditton, Master of the new Mathematical-School in Christ's Hospital, London. What Longitude is, Kepler tells us in these Words; Est arcus aequatoris terrestris (vel etiam paralleli per locum ducti) interceptus inter primum meridianum terrestrem & inter meridianum loci, & in consequentia numeratus. Epit. astron. copernic. lib. 3. Now the finding out of Longitude is to discover, as certain a Rule of knowing how far we are distant on the Spherical surface of the Earth in Degrees and Minutes, from any known Meridian, Eastward or Westward, as we do for knowing how far we are distant in Degrees and Minutes, on the same Surface, from the Equinoctial Line, Northward or Southward.
In order to bring so necessary a Work to Perfection, it is requisite that all Nations should agree upon one first Meridian, or beginning of Longitude, which at present is not concluded on; for some Cosmographers do make the chief and first Meridian pass through the Islands St. Michael and of the Azores, and there are Two Reasons why they did there begin to reckon the Longitude of the Earth: First, because at that Time there was no Land known farther to the Westward than that Place; and Secondly, because under that Meridian the Needle in the Marriners Compass had no Variation, but did point directly North and South. However, according to Ptolomy, that Meridian is said to be first and farthest Westward which passes through the Insulae Fortunatae, or Canary Isles, as Maginus thus tells us in his Geographical Relation thereof, Autem nominat eas Aprositum, Heram vel Autolalam, Pluitaliam, Casperiam, Canariam, & Centuriam; omnesque in rectam fere lineam a septentrione in Meridiem disponit, unde sub eodem meridiano cadunt, qui quidem Meridianus initium est computationis longitudinis terrae, Pag. 201. Here it is that famous Geographer fixt first his Meridian, for the West-Indies were not known nor discover'd in his Days, nor of a long time after; since when the Discovery of America being made by Americus Vesputius, Christopher Columbus, and others, latter Cosmographers having made the Meridian to pass through the Azores, as above-noted; and which Islands, as appears by their Cards, are scituated more Westward from the foresaid Insulae Fortunatae by 5 Degrees; from this altering the antient placing of the first Meridian, they must likewise alter all the Longitudes set down heretofore by Ptolemy, or any other antient Writer: Nevertheless this Matter is easily rectified, for by adding to every Longitude Eastward 5 Degrees, or by substracting 5 Degrees from every Longitude Westward, you shall not greatly vary from those antient Longitudes set down by them who reckon'd their first Meridian from the Azores.
Some endeavour to find out the Longitude of any City, Province, or Place, by the Eclipses of the Moon; which Gemma Frisius thinks to be the most exact and absolute of all other, and thus teaches to be done. Observe the beginning of the Eclipse in that Place whose Longitude is unknown, which if it shall agree in Hours and Minutes with the time of the beginning of the Eclipse at London, you may be certain that that Place is under the Meridian of London, whose Longitude is about 20 Degrees; but if the beginning of the Eclipse differs, then besure the Miridian and Longitude of that Place differs from the Meridian of London, which you may thus find: Substract the lesser Number of the Hours and Minutes of the beginning of the Eclipse from the greater, and the difference convert into Degrees and Minutes after this Manner: Take for every Hour 15 Degrees, for 4 Minutes 1 Degree, and for every Minute of an Hour 15 Minutes of a Degree; and the Number of Degrees and Minutes so found, add to the Degrees and Minutes of the Longitude of the Meridian of London, if it be more Oriental (that is, if the Number of Hours shall be found greater in the same) substract; if it be more Occidental (that is, if the Number of Hours there be found to be less) and you shall have the Longitude of the said City which was before unknown. I must acknowledge that Longitude may be pretty near found out this way, for being once with Sir Cloudesly Shovel, Admiral of the Red, in Italy, and taking an Observation at Venice, by an Eclipse of the Moon, I found the Longitude of that Place to be 36 Degrees 12 Minutes, correspondent to the Longitude given by Sansoon, the French Geographer, within 3 Minutes. To this Rule, for the most part, are Squared all Cosmographical Tables of Longitude; but yet in this divers Errors do happen, either by the Artificer oftentimes wanting Diligence in observing the right Hour and Moment of the Eclipse, or else the divers Epacts and Latitudes of the Moon are commonly neglected; wherefore it is the best way, in this Point, that exact Astronomers should at divers Places observe the same Eclipse, and so by conferring together, according to this Rule, find out the Longitude of different Places: But exact Astronomers cannot be easily found in every City or Town whereof we desire to know the Longitude, and neither is an Eclipse of the Moon always at command.
Now another Way to find out the Longitude, may be perform'd by a true Horology or Watch, which by an Astrolabe is to be rectified, and set just at such an Hour as you depart from the Place where you are, to go to any other Place, whereof you are desirous to know the Longitude: In which your going must be diligent to see that your Watch never ceases going, and being arrived at that Place whereof you seek to know the Longitude, you must tarry until the Index does justly touch the Prick of some perfect Hour, and also at that instant, to see what Hour it is by your Astrolabe: For if your Astrolabe and Watch do both agree in one, then there is no Difference of Longitude, but you have still travelled under one same Meridian, either towards the North or South. But if they differ One Hour, or certain Minutes, then reduce them to Degrees, or to Minutes of Degrees, as above taught, and thereby you shall find the Longitude desired to be known. But to take the Longitude upon the Sea by this manner of way, in may Opinion it is better to do it by a great HourGlass, made to run Twenty Four Hours, which must be watched when it is ready to run out, that it may be immediately turn'd: For Watches made of Iron or Steel, will soon Rust upon the Sea. This way I made an Observation (at the Desire of Admiral Wheeler, drown'd near the Streights) when I was at Placentia-Bay in Newfoundland, and found the Experiment true according to the best SeaCharts; however, this way either by Watch or Hour-Glass is not always to be depended on, because Watches and Clocks will inequally move, especially on the Sea, and the Sands of an Hour-Glass do not always keep the like Motion: Therefore if any Certainty may be this way, it must be by the Help of the Automaton, or perpetual Motion, of which Invention we may as much doubt, as of Mr. Whiston or Mr. Ditton finding out the Longitude by firing Guns or Sky-Rockets.
I must acknowledge that by Trigonometry, we may, when the Latitudes and Difference of Longitude of Two Places are given, find the Rhumb and Distance. When the Latitudes of two Places, and their Distances are given, we may find the Rumb, and Difference of Longitude. By the Rumb, and Latitudes of Two Places given, we may find their Distance and Difference of Longitude. By the Difference of Longitude, Rumb, and One Latitude, we may find the other Latitude and Distance. And by the Rumb, the Distance, and One Latitude given, we may find the other Latitude, and the Difference of Longitude. But for Mr. Whiston and Mr. Ditton, to impose so much upon the World, as to make People believe Longitude is to be Discover'd either by Sea or Land, by a Propagation of Sounds, the Noise of Cannon, and firing Squibs and Crackers, without taking any Notice of their fixing Hulls at certain Distances in the Sea, they may as well persuade our Country-Men, that White is Black, and Black's White: But never an Arrian in this Kingdom, shall seduce me to hold with him in so great an Error.
Again, by the Distance betwixt the Moon and some known Star, which is situated near the Ecliptick, the Longitude may be found out, as taught by Appian, and illustrated by Gemma Frisius, to whose manner of Explication, we have for farther Illustration added a Figure of the Parallax, whereon this Invention is grounded. To shew then this Conclusion, we must tell you that the Distances betwixt the Moon and other Stars in the Firmament, are varied according to the Difference of Places, insomuch as Two Men living far distant in divers Places of the Earth, beholding at one Time the Moon, and some known fixt Star, will not find the like Distance betwixt them, whereof if a Man doubt, he may be inform'd by this Figure. We will imagine P. to be the Place of the Moon, as seated in the lower Orb; G. to be the Place of the fixt Star, whose Distance from the Moon is inquired; E. and F. Two Stations or Habitations of Men dwelling on the Earth, whereof we may imagine the one to be in Europe, and the other in America; it will be manifest that the Inhabitants situated in F. will behold the Moon in the Point B. and the fixt Star in G. 
 
because, as the Opticks teach us, all Things are seen in the Places opposite to the Eye, so the Distance between the Moon and Star, will be the Arch of the greatest Circle, B.G. and the Inhabitants situated in E. will behold the Moon by the Ray E.C. as likewise the fixt Star G. in the Point G. by the Ray E.G; so that the Distance betwixt the Moon and the fixt Star, will be in that Station the Arch of the Circle C.G. Now by the first common Axiom of Euclid, that the Arch B. G. is greater than the Arch C.G. the former being the whole, and the other a Part. Next, out of the same Ground, we may as easily collect that this Distance betwixt the Moon and some other known fixt Star is varied proportionally, according to the Distances of the Places on the Earth, because so many Places as there are, so many Diversities of Aspects will arise, being increased or diminisht, according to the Distances of Places on the Terrestrial Globe: This Conclusion thus demonstrated, I shall proceed to the Practice of it in this manner.
I. It behoves you to search out by the Help of Astronomical Tables, the true Motion of the Moon, according to the Longitude, at the Time of your Observation at some certain Place, for whose Meridian the Roots of those Tables are calculated.
II. You must know the Degree of Longitude of some fixed Star, nigh unto the Ecliptick, either preceeding or following the Motion of the Moon.
III. You must seek out the Distance of the Motion of the Moon, and the said Star.
IV. The Distance once had, apply the Cross-Staff of your Sight, and so move the Cross to and fro, till you may behold the Centre of the Moon at the one End, and the fixed Star with the other.
So shall you see exprest by the Degrees and Minutes markt on the Staff, the Distance of the Moon and the said Star correspondent to the Place of your Observation; which being noted, set down also the Distance betwixt the Moon and the aforesaid Star which was first Calculated. Then Substract the lesser from the greater, the Remainder will shew the least Difference, which being Divided by the Motion which the Moon makes in One Hour, you shall know the Time in which the Moon is or was joyn'd with the first Distance of the said Star; then having converted that Time into Degrees and Minutes, the rest will be perform'd, either by Addition or Substraction of the Product thereof to or from that Meridian, for which the Tables whereby you first Calculated the Motion of the Moon were appointed and verified. If the Distance betwixt the Moon and the fixt Star of your Observation be lesser, then must you add the Degrees and Minutes to the known Longitude, so shall you find the Place of your Observation to be more Eastward. If it be greater, then Substract the Degrees and Minutes from the known Longitude, and the Place of your Observation in this Regard will be more Westward. The Rules are so far true, that the Moon being suppos'd to be more Westward than the fixt Star, for if otherwise your Working must be clean contrary; to wit, if the Distance betwixt the Moon and the fixed Star be lesser, you must Substract the Degrees and Minutes from the known Longitude, so shall the Place of your Observation be more Westward; but if it be greater, then must you add the Degrees and Minutes unto the known Longitude, and the Place of your Observation shall be found Eastward. This way, though more difficult, may seem better than the rest, because an Eclipse of the Moon seldom happens, and a Watch, Clock, or Hour-glass cannot so well be preserv'd, or at least so well observ'd in a long Voyage; when every Night may seem to give Occasion to this Experiment, if the Air be free from Clouds, and the Moon shews her self above the Horizon.
This way of finding out the Longitude I have experienced in the Mediteranean Sea, when the late Earl of Orford first appear'd in those Parts of the World with the grand Fleet of England, after obtaining an entire Victory over the French at Sea; but besides, by the Observation of the Difference in the Motion of the Sun and Moon, the Longitude of Places may be found out. Now for the performing it hereof by this Rule, you must consider, that we take as granted by all Mathematicians, that the Motion of the Moon is 48 Minutes of an Hour slower in 24 Hours, or 360 Degrees, than that of the Sun; that by Observation of the Heavens, and other Mathematical Helps, an Artist may know in any Place the first Meridian, the Hour of the Day, and the Time of the Moon's coming to the Meridian by an Ephemerides: Then for Example, suppose that in London the Moon on some set Day comes to the Meridian at Four of the Clock past Noon, and in some Part of the West-Indies the Moon is observ'd to come to the Meridian the same Day at Ten Minutes after Four, these Grounds thus set down, the Distance of Longitude at that Place Westward from London may be in this manner found out by the Golden Rule. If the Difference of the Sun's and Moon's Motion be 48 Minutes of an Hour in 360 Degrees, what will it be in 10 Minutes? The fourth proportional Number will be 75 Degrees, the Distance of Longitude of the Place assign'd from London, in West Longitude; from which Number the Longitude from London being Substracted, and the Remainder from 360, the Residue will shew the Longitude: But Note, that if the Moon in the Place assign'd comes sooner to the Meridian, we must count so much in East Longitude.
Indeed there are few Things in Nature, which have more perplext the Wits of ingenious Mathematicians, than the exactest way of finding out the Longitude of Places; not that the Matter was over difficult in it self, but that they fought out a Way to perform this Conclusion, not depending from the Observation of the Celestial Bodies and Motions; and also it is a Matter never found out as yet; because they propos'd to themselves one of these two Ways to find it out, either by some magnetical Instrument, or else by Industry of Navigation, neither of which can much profit. Not the former, because there have never been any fixed Points found in the Equator betwixt East and West, as have been observ'd betwixt North and South, so that nothing can proceed out of the meer Nature of the earthly Globe, whereon we may ground any difference of Longitude; neither is the second very beneficial, for all Voyages both by Sea and Land are very irregular and uncertain, either by reason of sundry Impediments, as Rocks, Mountains, Woods, contrary Winds, and other Dangers turning aside the direct Course of Passengers from any direct Way or Observation; or else by the Ignorance of Marriners, which seldom passes so far on Discovery; and if they do, know not perfectly to delineate out their Journey, as a Cosmographer would expect, to any tolerable satisfaction.
Herein have we allow'd that at present the best Ways to find out the Longitudes of Places are by Eclipses of the Moon, the Motion of the Moon, and by Clocks, Watches, or HourGlasses; but cannot agree with Mr. Whiston and Ditton, that they may be found out by the Eclipses of Jupiter's Planets, or Satellits, nor by the Log-Line or dead Reckoning; which last Way is such an inaccurate Rule, that all Ingenious Men must think those Persons Mad who should offer to propose it for a Means to find out Longitude, when by it the best Seaman cannot tell in what Latitude he is. But when I seriously meditate on these Two Gentlemens Method of finding out the Longitude by Sounds, it seems to me the greatest Soloecism in Nature; for as Marriners, to be the better assur'd of their Routs and Courses on the Sea, divide every quarter of the Horizon into Eight several Winds, so that they make the Compass to contain 32 Points: Suppose then, that a Sound shall be made when the Wind is North-East, what Benefit shall they receive by it who are SouthEast and by South? It may go towards them that lie South-West, and one Point on each side of it; but to them in other Points can scarce, if at all be heard. Next considering the various Positions of the Wind, make what Invention they think fittest to diffuse a Sound more horizontally, and how suddenly it shifts its Corner for several Points together, what certainty can those that listen for it have, in order to find out Longitude? Especially such as lie to the Windward of Sounds about the Caribby Islands in the West-Indies, and in other Parts of the Atlantick Ocean, where there is a Trade-Wind or constant blowing always from one Point with little variation, excepting in or near the Month of August, when those Parts are dreadfully afflicted with furious Storms call'd Hurricanes. Also Sounds will be of no Effect in those Seas or Parts of the Ocean where Monsoons are usual, which is a periodical blowing one half Year one way, and the other half Year the contrary; and the Limits of these Winds extend almost to the Latitude of 30 Degrees on each side the Equinoctial Line; besides the shifting of these contrary Winds call'd Monsoons, mostly between the two Tropicks on each side the Equator, is not all at once, but sometimes is attended with Calms and variable Winds, and sometimes with violent Storms that seem to be of the Nature of the West-Indian Hurricanes, and these Tempests or Tornado's are by the Marrines term'd the breaking up of the Monsoons.
Moreover, it is impossible to make the Engines which are to make the Sounds, to give all of them Sounds of the same Strength, Tenor and Circumstances, so that the Hearers shall tell by Ear in what Longitude they be; nor can I conceive how a Sound can move circularly (as Mr. Whiston and Mr. Ditton do alledge) unless the Wind blows all the Points of the Compass at the same time the Sound is given. And again, when the Sound is heard, at such and such distances, I am sure they cannot tell no more by the Sound how many Miles off it was made, than they can by it discover what Meridian they are under; but could the Hearers by the Sound tell what Meridian they were near, why then I must own they could tell the distance of that Place from the Place departed; because as Langius tells us, Maximum usum habet Meridianus in supputandis locorum distantiis, quae vel sola longitudine vel sola latitudine, vel etiam utraque dimensione differunt. Next as Cluverius rightly affirms, Mutabilis dicitur Meridianus, quia si tantillum, ortum occasumve versus progrediaris, alius continuo erit Meridianus. It is a Paradox to me how the hearers shall know that the interval of apparent Time, in Two Places, where a Sound is excited, and where it is receiv'd, besides that which is due to the real Propagation of the Sound itself, shall be the difference of their Meridians, or of their Longitude in Time. Now the Engine or Instrument which these Gentlemen propose to make the Sound with, is a great Gun, in which also can be no certainty, because every Gun, tho' of a like Bore, Bigness and Metal, will not give the like Sound, neither is Gun-powder of the like Strength; and when these two famous Artists talk, that Fire or Light 6440 Feet high will be visible, in the Night-time, when the Air is tolerably clear about 100 Measur'd, or 85 Geographical Miles, that is one whole Degree and 25 Minutes of a great Circle, from the Place where it is, even upon the Surface of the Sea; this Assertion seems to me as if they aim'd to have Beacons placed over the Watry Dominions of Neptune, and Warning Guns fixt on all the Mountains adjacent to the liquid Element, that the Spectator and Auditor may both see and hear how far he is from Land. A petty Projection I vow! As is also their fixing Hulls of Ships, without Sails or Rigging at Sea, in all ordinary Cases, by Anchors; and in extraordinary Cases, where the Ocean is vastly deep, by Weights let down from the Hulls quite thro' the upper Currents into the still Water below, as near as possible to the bottom. Indeed to try the Experiment would require a great many Hulls, for multiplying the Periphery or Cirumference of the World, which is 21600 Miles, by the Diameter 7200 Miles, the Product is 155520000 Miles, which is the Number of Square Miles on the face of the Terrestial Globe; then dividing them Square Miles by 7225, the Number of Square Miles in 85 Geographical Miles multiply'd in itself, and which is the distance they would have these Hulls placed from one another; besides having Masts erected upon hollow empty Vessels with White Spheres at their Tops, to be fixt in proper Places, at equal distances between these Hulls, for the more sure guiding Ships in Places of Danger, the Product of the aforesaid Operation in Division is 21525; but allowing one Third of the Globe to be Earth, and so dividing the last Number by 3, the Product will be 7175, the Number of Hulls to be continually kept in Use, and which will not take less than (if you allow but Eight Men to a Hull) 57400 Men to look after them.
Truly this is a very whimsical Notion, looking very Ridiculous in Mr. Ditton and Mr. Whiston; the first of which Gentlemen I do not know, but as for the other, People says he is a little beside himself, or rather, if he has any such Thing as Brains, they are really crackt. They might as well have propos'd a Method of building half-way Houses on the Ocean from London to all Place as we Trade to; for suppose we could raise so many Men as above-mention'd, how many of them would be willing to lead such desolate Lives as they must on the Sea, in the danger of Drowning and Famine? Even Malefactors would refuse a Pardon upon Condition of living under such a solitary Confinement. But perhaps these Gentlemen may say that we are not to be at the aforesaid Charge of keeping so many Men and Hulls, but every Nation must keep a certain Compliment of these Hulls and empty Vessels with erected Masts, according to the Extent thereof abutting on the Sea: Why we'll suppose all this, and what then? As one Nation was at War with another, they would spoil these Sea-marks; and Pyrates having regard to no Nation, they would destroy all of 'em, to supply themselves with Men, as they should have occasion. Moreover, other ill Conveniencies will accrue to this Project, for in Storms the Cables of those Hulls that lie at Anchor will oftentimes break, and such as are in the Ocean with deep Weights hanging from them into the Water, will drive about with the Wind and strong Currents, were ever so many heavy Weights fixt to them; I have seen this Experiment try'd in a great Storm once in the Bay of Biscay, and another time in the Gulph of Florida, and found this Citation false which Mr. Whiston and Mr. Ditton quote out of the Philosophical Transactions, That Ships having heavy Weights let down by Ropes from them into the lower Parts of the Waters in the Ocean, when Tempestuous, will ride as firmly as if fasten'd by the strongest Cable and Anchor to the bottom. And if so be these Hulls, as I have Remark'd above, lie expos'd to the Casualties of having the Cables of their Anchors broke, and these Hulls which have Weights hanging from them into the Waters of the Ocean, will not remain fixt in Stormy Weather, but drive many Leagues about with the Wind and Currents, I demand which way they'll know how to find their old Stations again, when the Storm is over? Upon my Word this new Method of finding out the Longitude of Places is very insignificant, and if (as they say) in case some Parts of the Ocean prove so very deep and rough that no Hulls can be fixt in them, the way to recover the Longitude, which may be by this means interrupted, is rightly propos'd by Sir Isaac Newton himself, in his Paper deliver'd in to the House of Commons, declaring that upon such Accidents, they must Sail obliquely from the last Hull into the Parallel of the next, and so all along the same till upon approaching to that next Hull the Longitude be a new recover'd, and the Voyage be continu'd as before. Let me ask, may none of these Hulls be lost in bad Weather? And if so, what Course must the Ship then Sail that is to be guided by such a Mark at Sea? Again, is it be to suppos'd that Ships setting out from London, Bristol, Leith, or any other Part of Great-Britain, will Sail out of their way to be guided by these Hulls and empty Vessels, which may lie many Leagues to the Windward or Leeward of them? No, they will make the best of their way; and tho' they may get Men to supply these Hulls in hot Climates, I question whether any will be so mad as to look after them about Baffin's Bay, Groenland, Button's-Bay, Greenland, Scythick Ocean, Tartarian Sea, and the Streights of Magellan; where they must most part of the Year encounter with more than Cimmerian Darkness, destructive Cold, Mountains of Snow, and Rocks of Ice; in the midst of these Extremities the explorsions of Guns, firing combustible Matter in the Air, and other Signals would be wholly laid aside.
As for the Method which Mr. Hobbs proposes for finding out of the Longitude, I shall not descant on that, because it is as useless as the other: I shall now proceed to declare, that the Rules which I have before allow'd for the finding out the Longitude of Places are the best hitherto know; but as the certainty is not infallible, give me leave to say farther, that the Longitude is never to be exactly found out till an Instrument is made for that Purpose, which shall shew the Longitude of any Place, when the Sun shines, with as much exactness as the Quadrate discovers the Latitude. Such an one I hope shortly to bring to Perfection, fixing the first Meridian at Westminster-Abby, and allowing for every Degree of Longitude on each side the Equinoctial Line, the Number of Miles and Minutes set down in the following Table.

Degrees. Miles. Parts. Degrees. Miles. Parts.
1 59 59 18 57 4
2 59 58 19 56 44
3 59 55 20 56 23
4 59 51 21 56 1
5 59 46 22 55 38
6 59 40 23 55 14
7 59 33 24 54 49
8 59 25 25 54 23
9 59 16 26 53 6
10 59 5 27 53 28
11 58 54 28 52 59
12 58 41 29 52 29
13 58 2 30 51 58
14 58 13 31 51 26
15 57 57 32 50 53
16 57 41 33 50 19
17 57 23 34 49 45
Degrees. Miles. Parts. Degrees. Miles. Parts.
35 49 9 63 27 14
3648 32 64 26 18
37 47 55 65 25 21
38 47 17 66 24 24
39 46 38 67 23 27
40 45 58 68 22 29
41 45 17 69 21 30
42 44 35 70 20 31
43 43 53 71 19 32
44 43 10 72 18 32
45 42 26 73 17 33
46 41 41 74 16 32
47 40 55 75 15 32
48 39 9 76 14 31
49 39 22 77 13 30
50 38 34 78 12 28
51 37 46 79 11 27
52 36 56 80 10 25
53 36 7 81 9 23
54 35 6 82 8 21
55 34 25 83 7 19
56 33 33 84 6 16
57 32 41 84 6 16
58 31 48 86 4 11
59 30 54 87 3 8
60 30 0 88 2 5
61 29 5 89 1 3
62 28 10 90 0 0
Note, that in the first Column you have the Number of Degrees, to the uttermost Extent of the Northern or Southern Pole on either side the Equator; the second Column shews the Number of Miles contain'd in each of the 90 Degrees upwards or downwards; and the third the Parts of a Mile; and the same Table serves to shew how many Minutes and Seconds are requisite to make one Degree of the Equinoctial, by supposing the second Column to be Degrees instead of Miles, and the third Column Seconds instead of Parts of a Mile. 'Tis true, there is a great Difference among Authors concerning the Circuit of the whole Earth, for Strabo and Hipparchus compute it at 31500 Miles; Eratosthenes at 31250 Miles; Possidonius and the antient Arabians at 30000 Miles; Ptolomy at 22500 Miles; and the latter Arabians at 25500 Miles: But I follow the Italians and Germans, who reckon the Earth to be 21600 Miles in Circumference; and having no leisure now to enquire into the Reasons, for these great Mathematicians so widely disagreeing in their Mensuration of the Earth, I shall only add, that the Instrument which I shall propose for finding out of the Longitude of Places, will likewise shew the Elevation of the Pole in any Degree of Latitude North or South, the Bearings of one Place from another, and the exact Hour of the Day either by Sea or Land; but in the mean time, my Reader must Pardon me, for not describing by a Figure the Form thereof, and in what manner I shall make my Projection good, since such a Discovery would set others to try the Experiment; therefore the World must have a little Patience, for since I have spent a great deal of Pains and Time, without taking any notice of Charges, in the Invention of the Instrument, it is but reasonable that the Inventor should have the Encouragement to be given, in case it answers what he proposes.
------
FINIS.
------


